.\" Copyright (c) 2000
.\"	Mike W. Meyer
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man7/build.7,v 1.19.2.1 2002/03/18 08:33:02 murray Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 26, 2014
.Dt BUILD 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm build
.Nd information on how to build the system
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The source for the
.Dx
system and applications is located in
.Pa /usr/src .
This directory contains the
.Dq "base system"
sources, which is loosely defined as the things required to rebuild
the system to a useful state.
It also contains the source for the system documentation, including
manual pages.
Refer to
.Xr development 7
for more information on how to obtain the
.Dx
sources.
.Pp
Third party applications have to be built using the
.Xr dports 7
system.
The file
.Pa /usr/Makefile
has targets for obtaining the dports tree.
Typing
.Li make
in
.Pa /usr
gives specifics on how to obtain the tree for building packages.
.Pp
The
.Xr make 1
command is used in
.Pa /usr/src
to build and install the things in that directory.
Issuing the
.Xr make 1
command in any directory or
subdirectory of those directories has the same effect as issuing the
same command in all subdirectories of that directory.
With no target specified, the things in that directory are just built.
The following list provides the names and actions for other targets:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm install"
.It Cm clean
Removes any files created during the build process.
.It Cm install
Installs the results of the build for this directory.
.El
.Pp
The other
.Pa /usr/src
make targets are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm backup-auto-clean"
.It Cm buildworld
Rebuild everything but the kernel.
.It Cm quickworld
Same as
.Cm buildworld ,
but skip bootstrap, build and cross-build tool steps.
This target can be used for incremental upgrades once a full build of the
world has been done with
.Cm buildworld .
.It Cm realquickworld
Same as
.Cm quickworld ,
but also skip the depend step.
.It Cm crossworld
Just do the bootstrap, build and cross-build steps.
.It Cm installworld
Install everything built by
.Cm buildworld .
.It Cm world
.Cm buildworld +
.Cm installworld .
.It Cm buildkernel
Rebuild the kernel and the kernel-modules.
.It Cm nativekernel
Rebuild the kernel and the kernel-modules using native tools.
.It Cm quickkernel
Same as
.Cm buildkernel ,
but skip the depend step and do not clean out the
obj modules.
This target can be used for incremental upgrades once a full
build of the kernel has been done with
.Cm buildkernel .
.It Cm installkernel
Install the kernel and the kernel-modules.
.It Cm reinstallkernel
Reinstall the kernel and the kernel-modules.
.It Cm kernel
.Cm buildkernel +
.Cm installkernel .
.It Cm preupgrade
Perform certain upgrades that have to be done before
.Cm installworld .
.Cm installworld
will complain if they have not been done.
.It Cm upgrade
Upgrade the files in /etc and also setup the rest of the system for
the version of
.Dx
just installed.
.It Cm rescue
Create a rescue initrd.
.It Cm most
Build user commands, no libraries or include files.
.It Cm installmost
Install user commands, no libraries or include files.
.It Cm backupworld
Manually archive binaries from installed world to location specified by
.Ev WORLD_BACKUP .
.It Cm backup-clean
Delete archive created by
.Cm backupworld .
.It Cm backup-auto-clean
Delete archive created automatically during
.Cm installworld .
.It Cm restoreworld
Restore binaries from archive created by
.Cm backupworld .
.It Cm restoreworld-auto
Restore binaries from archive created automatically during
.Cm installworld .
The archive location is specified by
.Ev AUTO_BACKUP .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX"
.It Ev TARGET_ARCH , TARGET_PLATFORM
The target machine processor architecture and hardware platform.
These have to be set for cross-building.
.Ev TARGET_ARCH
is analogous to the
.Dq Nm uname Fl p
output.
To build for the 32 bit
.Tn Intel
architecture known as IA-32, x86 or x86-32, use:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
TARGET_ARCH=i386
TARGET_PLATFORM=pc32
.Ed
.Pp
For the 64 bit
.Tn AMD
architecture known as AMD64, x86-64 or Intel 64, use:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
TARGET_ARCH=x86_64
TARGET_PLATFORM=pc64
.Ed
.It Ev DESTDIR
An existing directory to be the root of
the hierarchy where the resulting binaries will be
installed (the default is
.Pa / ) .
.It Ev MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX
The directory hierarchy where the object files will be built (the default is
.Pa /usr/obj ) .
.It Ev __MAKE_CONF
Used to override the path of
.Xr make.conf 5
(the default is
.Pa /etc/make.conf ) .
.It Ev KERNCONF
The name of the kernel configuration file from which the kernel should
be built (the default is
.Li GENERIC ) .
.It Ev KERNCONFDIR
The directory where the kernel configuration files are kept (the default is
.Pa /usr/src/sys/config ) .
.It Ev DESTLABEL
Common suffix added to kernel and modules directory names, prefixed by
a single dot.  For example,
.Bd -literal -offset indent
make DESTLABEL=test installkernel
.Ed
.Pp
installs them as
.Pa /boot/kernel.test
and
.Pa /boot/modules.test ,
respectively.
.It Ev DESTKERNDIR
Where to install the kernel and the modules (the default is
.Pa /boot ) ,
in the directory hierarchy specified by the environment variable
.Ev DESTDIR .
.It Ev DESTKERNNAME
The name of the installed kernel file (the default is
.Pa kernel ) ,
under the directory specified by
.Ev DESTKERNDIR .
This overrides the effect of
.Ev DESTLABEL .
.It Ev DESTMODULESNAME
The name of the directory to install the kernel modules (the default is
.Pa modules ) ,
under the directory specified by
.Ev DESTKERNDIR .
This overrides the effect of
.Ev DESTLABEL .
.It Ev WORLD_BACKUP
Directory for manual backup of binaries of installed world (default:
.Pa /var/backups/world_backup ) .
.It Ev AUTO_BACKUP
Directory for automatic backup of binaries of installed world (default:
.Ev MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX Ns /world_binaries/ Ns Ev DESTDIR ) .
.It Ev NO_BACKUP
When defined, the automatic backup feature of
.Cm installworld
is inhibited.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /usr/src/Makefile_upgrade.inc" -compact
.It Pa /etc/make.conf
.It Pa /etc/defaults/make.conf
.It Pa /usr/src/share/doc/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile.inc1
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile_upgrade.inc
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The
.Dq approved
method of updating your system from the latest sources is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
make buildworld
make buildkernel KERNCONF=FOO
make installkernel KERNCONF=FOO
make installworld
make upgrade
.Ed
.Pp
After running these commands a system reboot is required,
otherwise many programs which have been rebuilt (such as
.Xr ps 1 ,
.Xr top 1 ,
etc.) may not work with the old kernel which is still running.
.Sh CAVEATS
The build and install order in the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section enforces that the new kernel is installed before the new
world.
Sometimes it might be necessary to reboot the system between those two
steps.
In this case
.Dq Nm make Cm installworld
will tell you to do so.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cc 1 ,
.Xr install 1 ,
.Xr make 1 ,
.Xr wmake 1 ,
.Xr make.conf 5 ,
.Xr development 7 ,
.Xr dports 7 ,
.Xr release 7 ,
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr reboot 8 ,
.Xr shutdown 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An Mike W. Meyer Aq Mt mwm@mired.org
and
.An Sascha Wildner Aq Mt swildner@gmail.com .
