.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man7/release.7,v 1.3.2.6 2003/04/12 20:42:30 murray Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 3, 2020
.Dt NRELEASE 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nrelease
.Nd release building infrastructure
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Dx
provides a complete build environment suitable for users to make
full releases of the
.Dx
operating system.
All of the tools necessary to build releases are available from the
git repository in
.Pa src/nrelease .
A complete release (that is, a live CD) can actually be built with
only a single command.
This command is aptly named
.Dq Li "make release" .
.Pp
This document does not cover source code management, quality
assurance, or other aspects of the release engineering process.
.Sh TARGETS
The release Makefile
.Pq Pa src/nrelease/Makefile
defines a number of targets which are roughly modeled after the
targets used for building the system.
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm realquickrel"
.It Cm help
Offer some help.
.It Cm release
Builds world and kernel, installs them, adds packages and prepares the ISO
image.
.It Cm quickrel
Same as
.Cm release
but uses the
.Cm quickworld
target (alias
.Cm quick ) .
.It Cm realquickrel
Same as
.Cm release
but uses the
.Cm realquickworld
target (alias
.Cm realquick ) .
.It Cm clean
Removes the ISO root directory and object files.
.It Cm realclean
Same as
.Cm clean
but also removes external packages.
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm quickrel
and
.Cm realquickrel
targets will only work if a full
.Cm buildworld
and
.Cm buildkernel
have been done before.
For a description of the corresponding build targets, see
.Xr build 7 .
.Pp
A number of additional targets may be specified along with
.Cm release ,
.Cm quickrel ,
or
.Cm realquickrel
to add additional features:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm realquickrel"
.It Cm gui
Adds
.Xr Xorg 1
along with some additional applications to the ISO (LiveDVD).
.It Cm nopkgs
Do not add any packages (for debugging purposes).
This is equivalent to setting
.Va DPORTS_PACKAGES
empty.
.It Cm binpkgs
Install binary packages using
.Xr pkg 8
instead of building them from
.Xr dports 7 .
.El
.Pp
During the process of rolling a release a check is performed to find
out if external packages to be put on the CD exist on your system.
If they cannot be found, the release process will stop and give
proper commands for downloading and setting up these packages.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width ".Va DPORTS_EXTRA_PACKAGES"
.It Va DPORTS_PACKAGES
List of packages to be added to the ISO.
.It Va DPORTS_EXTRA_PACKAGES
List of packages, in addition to
.Va DPORTS_PACKAGES ,
to be added to the ISO.
.It Va DPORTS_PATH
Location of the
.Xr dports 7
tree to be used for package building.
.It Va GITURL_SRC
The Git URL to the system source repository.
.It Va GITURL_DPORTS
The Git URL to the
.Xr dports 7
repository.
.It Va IMGFILE
The name of the image file (default is
.Pa /usr/obj/release/dfly.img ) .
.It Va IMGMNT
The mount point for the image (default is
.Pa /usr/obj/release/mnt ) .
.It Va IMGSIZE
The size of the IMG file (in units of 512-byte sector).
The default size is determined from the actual content by leaving about
600 MB free space.
.It Va ISODIR
Default prefix of
.Va ISOFILE
and
.Va ISOROOT
(default is
.Pa /usr/obj/release ) .
.It Va ISOFILE
Name of the ISO image to generate (default is
.Pa /usr/obj/release/dfly.iso ) .
.It Va ISOROOT
Location where the image contents are installed to before the ISO is prepared.
.It Va KERNCONF
Kernel configuration to use.
.It Va LABEL
The name of the
.Xr disklabel64 5
slice in the IMG file and is used to identify the installation USB device.
The is also the volume ID of the ISO file.
.It Va NREL_MAKE_JOBS
The number of make jobs (default is the value of sysctl
.Va hw.ncpu ) .
.It Va PKG_ Ns Aq Ar port
Specify the binary package name for port
.Dq port .
.It Va WITHOUT_SRCS
If set, this variable will prevent source code from being copied to
the ISO image.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact -width ".Pa src/nrelease/Makefile"
.It Pa /etc/make.conf
.It Pa src/Makefile
.It Pa src/Makefile.inc1
.It Pa src/nrelease/Makefile
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following sequence of commands is used to build a standard
.Dx 2.0
installation CD image (assuming that a local git repository is
available, see
.Xr development 7
for how to get this):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd /usr/src
git checkout -b rel2_0 crater/DragonFly_RELEASE_2_0
cd nrelease
make release
.Ed
.Pp
After running these commands, the image will be available in the
.Pa /usr/obj/release
directory.
.\".Pp
.\"The steps required for engineering a release are documented in (CVS)
.\".Pa doc/notes/release.txt
.\"(how to branch the CVS tree etc.)
.\"They were put in an out of the way place so normal developers would not
.\"accidentally try to run the commands in question.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr git 1 ,
.Xr make 1 ,
.Xr make.conf 5 ,
.Xr build 7 ,
.Xr development 7 ,
.Xr dports 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
framework was added in
.Dx 1.0
to implement the idea of a
.Dq "live CD" .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
infrastructure was written by
.An Matthew Dillon .
This manual page was written by
.An Sascha Wildner .
