.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 20, 2012
.Dt STANDARDS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm standards
.Nd standards supported by DragonFly
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd "#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 600"
.Pp
.In sys/cdefs.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A number of
.Dq feature test macros ,
namely
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
and
.Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE ,
can be used by applications to indicate desired sets of features (beyond
those specified by the C standard) in the programming environment supplied by
.Dx .
These macros determine which prototypes are exposed by header files and so on.
.Pp
If neither
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
and
.Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE
are set, the programming environment defaults to
.St -susv3 .
In addition, a number of
.Bx
specific prototypes, definitions etc.\& are made visible.
.Ss POSIX Standards (_POSIX_C_SOURCE)
The value of the
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
macro determines which
.Tn POSIX
standard the programming environment conforms to.
.Bl -tag -width ".Li 199009"
.It Li 1
Make definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.1-90
visible.
Implies
.St -isoC-90 .
.It Li 2
Additionally, make definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.2-92
visible.
.It Li 199009
Same as
.Li 1 .
.It Li 199209
Same as
.Li 2 .
.It Li 199309
Additionally, make definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.1b-93
visible.
.It Li 199506
Additionally, make definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.1c-95
visible.
.It Li 200112
Additionally, make definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.1-2001
visible.
Implies
.St -isoC-99 .
This is the default.
.It Li 200809
Additionally, make definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.1-2008
visible.
Implies
.St -isoC-99 .
.El
.Pp
Defining
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
to any value lower than
.Li 199009
(other than
.Li 1
or
.Li 2 )
makes it default to
.Li 198808
which makes definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.1-88
visible.
No C standard is implied in this case.
.Pp
Defining the obsolete
.Dv _POSIX_SOURCE
macro without defining
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
is equivalent to defining
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
to
.Li 198808 .
.Ss X/Open CAE Specifications (_XOPEN_SOURCE)
The value of the
.Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE
macro determines which X/Open CAE specification the programming
environment conforms to.
.Bl -tag -width ".Li 500"
.It Li 500
Make definitions conforming to the
.St -susv2
visible.
Implies defining
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
to
.Li 199506 .
.It Li 600
Make definitions conforming to the
.St -susv3
visible.
Implies defining
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
to
.Li 200112 .
This is the default.
.It Li 700
Make definitions conforming to
.St -p1003.1-2008
and to the corresponding XSI extensions visible.
.El
.Pp
If both CAE and POSIX conformance is required, only
.Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE
can be set.
.\".Ss Miscellaneous Macros
.\".Dv _ANSI_SOURCE
.\".Dv _C99_SOURCE
.\".Dv _DRAGONFLY_SOURCE
.\".Dv _NETBSD_SOURCE
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Pa http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/
.St -p1003.1-2008
.It Pa http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/
.St -p1003.1-2004
.It Pa http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/7908799/
.St -susv2
.It Pa http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9695969499/toc.pdf
.St -xsh4.2
.El
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Dx 2.7 .
