.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Matthew Dillon.  Terms and conditions are those of
.\" the BSD Copyright as specified in the file "/usr/src/COPYRIGHT" in
.\" the source tree.
.\"
.Dd August 13, 2017
.Dt TUNING 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tuning
.Nd performance tuning under DragonFly
.Sh SYSTEM SETUP
Modern
.Dx
systems typically have just three partitions on the main drive.
In order, a UFS
.Pa /boot ,
.Pa swap ,
and a HAMMER
.Pa root .
The installer used to create separate PFSs for half a dozen directories,
but now it just puts (almost) everything in the root.
It will separate stuff that doesn't need to be backed up into a /build
subdirectory and create null-mounts for things like /usr/obj, but it
no longer creates separate PFSs for these.
If desired, you can make /build its own mount to separate-out the
components of the filesystem which do not need to be persistent.
.Pp
Generally speaking the
.Pa /boot
partition should be 1GB in size.  This is the minimum recommended
size, giving you room for backup kernels and alternative boot schemes.
.Dx
always installs debug-enabled kernels and modules and these can take
up quite a bit of disk space (but will not take up any extra ram).
.Pp
In the old days we recommended that swap be sized to at least 2x main
memory.  These days swap is often used for other activities, including
.Xr tmpfs 5
and
.Xr swapcache 8 .
We recommend that swap be sized to the larger of 2x main memory or
1GB if you have a fairly small disk and 16GB or more if you have a
modestly endowed system.
If you have a modest SSD + large HDD combination, we recommend
a large dedicated swap partition on the SSD.  For example, if
you have a 128GB SSD and 2TB or more of HDD storage, dedicating
upwards of 64GB of the SSD to swap and using
.Xr swapcache 8
and
.Xr tmpfs 5
will significantly improve your HDD's performance.
.Pp
In an all-SSD or mostly-SSD system,
.Xr swapcache 8
is not normally used but you may still want to have a large swap
partition to support
.Xr tmpfs 5
use.
Our synth/poudriere build machines run with a 200GB
swap partition and use tmpfs for all the builder jails.  50-100 GB
is swapped out at the peak of the build.  As a result, actual
system storage bandwidth is minimized and performance increased.
.Pp
If you are on a minimally configured machine you may, of course,
configure far less swap or no swap at all but we recommend at least
some swap.
The kernel's VM paging algorithms are tuned to perform best when there is
swap space configured.
Configuring too little swap can lead to inefficiencies in the VM
page scanning code as well as create issues later on if you add
more memory to your machine, so don't be shy about it.
Swap is a good idea even if you don't think you will ever need it as it
allows the
machine to page out completely unused data and idle programs (like getty),
maximizing the ram available for your activities.
.Pp
If you intend to use the
.Xr swapcache 8
facility with a SSD + HDD combination we recommend configuring as much
swap space as you can on the SSD.
However, keep in mind that each 1GByte of swapcache requires around
1MByte of ram, so don't scale your swap beyond the equivalent ram
that you reasonably want to eat to support it.
.Pp
Finally, on larger systems with multiple drives, if the use
of SSD swap is not in the cards or if it is and you need higher-than-normal
swapcache bandwidth, you can configure swap on up to four drives and
the kernel will interleave the storage.
The swap partitions on the drives should be approximately the same size.
The kernel can handle arbitrary sizes but
internal data structures scale to 4 times the largest swap partition.
Keeping
the swap partitions near the same size will allow the kernel to optimally
stripe swap space across the N disks.
Do not worry about overdoing it a
little, swap space is the saving grace of
.Ux
and even if you do not normally use much swap, it can give you more time to
recover from a runaway program before being forced to reboot.
However, keep in mind that any sort of swap space failure can lock the
system up.
Most machines are setup with only one or two swap partitions.
.Pp
Most
.Dx
systems have a single HAMMER root.
PFSs can be used to administratively separate domains for backup purposes
but tend to be a hassle otherwise so if you don't need the administrative
separation you don't really need to use multiple HAMMER PFSs.
All the PFSs share the same allocation layer so there is no longer a need
to size each individual mount.
Instead you should review the
.Xr hammer 8
manual page and use the 'hammer viconfig' facility to adjust snapshot
retention and other parameters.
By default
HAMMER keeps 60 days worth of snapshots.
Usually snapshots are not desired on PFSs such as
.Pa /usr/obj
or
.Pa /tmp
since data on these partitions cycles a lot.
.Pp
If a very large work area is desired it is often beneficial to
configure it as a separate HAMMER mount.  If it is integrated into
the root mount it should at least be its own HAMMER PFS.
We recommend naming the large work area
.Pa /build .
Similarly if a machine is going to have a large number of users
you might want to separate your
.Pa /home
out as well.
.Pp
A number of run-time
.Xr mount 8
options exist that can help you tune the system.
The most obvious and most dangerous one is
.Cm async .
Do not ever use it; it is far too dangerous.
A less dangerous and more
useful
.Xr mount 8
option is called
.Cm noatime .
.Ux
filesystems normally update the last-accessed time of a file or
directory whenever it is accessed.
However, this creates a massive burden on copy-on-write filesystems like
HAMMER, particularly when scanning the filesystem.
.Dx
currently defaults to disabling atime updates on HAMMER mounts.
It can be enabled by setting the
.Va vfs.hammer.noatime
tunable to 0 in
.Xr loader.conf 5
but we recommend leaving it disabled.
The lack of atime updates can create issues with certain programs
such as when detecting whether unread mail is present, but
applications for the most part no longer depend on it.
.Sh SSD SWAP
The single most important thing you can do is have at least one
solid-state drive in your system, and configure your swap space
on that drive.
If you are using a combination of a smaller SSD and a very larger HDD,
you can use
.Xr swapcache 8
to automatically cache data from your HDD.
But even if you do not, having swap space configured on your SSD will
significantly improve performance under even modest paging loads.
It is particularly useful to configure a significant amount of swap
on a workstation, 32GB or more is not uncommon, to handle bloated
leaky applications such as browsers.
.Sh SYSCTL TUNING
.Xr sysctl 8
variables permit system behavior to be monitored and controlled at
run-time.
Some sysctls simply report on the behavior of the system; others allow
the system behavior to be modified;
some may be set at boot time using
.Xr rc.conf 5 ,
but most will be set via
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 .
There are several hundred sysctls in the system, including many that appear
to be candidates for tuning but actually are not.
In this document we will only cover the ones that have the greatest effect
on the system.
.Pp
The
.Va kern.ipc.shm_use_phys
sysctl defaults to 1 (on) and may be set to 0 (off) or 1 (on).
Setting
this parameter to 1 will cause all System V shared memory segments to be
mapped to unpageable physical RAM.
This feature only has an effect if you
are either (A) mapping small amounts of shared memory across many (hundreds)
of processes, or (B) mapping large amounts of shared memory across any
number of processes.
This feature allows the kernel to remove a great deal
of internal memory management page-tracking overhead at the cost of wiring
the shared memory into core, making it unswappable.
.Pp
The
.Va vfs.write_behind
sysctl defaults to 1 (on).  This tells the filesystem to issue media
writes as full clusters are collected, which typically occurs when writing
large sequential files.  The idea is to avoid saturating the buffer
cache with dirty buffers when it would not benefit I/O performance.  However,
this may stall processes and under certain circumstances you may wish to turn
it off.
.Pp
The
.Va vfs.hirunningspace
sysctl determines how much outstanding write I/O may be queued to
disk controllers system wide at any given instance.  The default is
usually sufficient but on machines with lots of disks you may want to bump
it up to four or five megabytes.  Note that setting too high a value
(exceeding the buffer cache's write threshold) can lead to extremely
bad clustering performance.  Do not set this value arbitrarily high!  Also,
higher write queueing values may add latency to reads occurring at the same
time.
The
.Va vfs.bufcache_bw
controls data cycling within the buffer cache.  I/O bandwidth less than
this specification (per second) will cycle into the much larger general
VM page cache while I/O bandwidth in excess of this specification will
be recycled within the buffer cache, reducing the load on the rest of
the VM system.
The default value is 200 megabytes (209715200), which means that the
system will try harder to cache data coming off a slower hard drive
and less hard trying to cache data coming off a fast SSD.
This parameter is particularly important if you have NVMe drives in
your system as these storage devices are capable of transferring
well over 2GBytes/sec into the system.
.Pp
There are various other buffer-cache and VM page cache related sysctls.
We do not recommend modifying their values.
.Pp
The
.Va net.inet.tcp.sendspace
and
.Va net.inet.tcp.recvspace
sysctls are of particular interest if you are running network intensive
applications.
They control the amount of send and receive buffer space
allowed for any given TCP connection.
However,
.Dx
now auto-tunes these parameters using a number of other related
sysctls (run 'sysctl net.inet.tcp' to get a list) and usually
no longer need to be tuned manually.
We do not recommend
increasing or decreasing the defaults if you are managing a very large
number of connections.
Note that the routing table (see
.Xr route 8 )
can be used to introduce route-specific send and receive buffer size
defaults.
.Pp
As an additional management tool you can use pipes in your
firewall rules (see
.Xr ipfw 8 )
to limit the bandwidth going to or from particular IP blocks or ports.
For example, if you have a T1 you might want to limit your web traffic
to 70% of the T1's bandwidth in order to leave the remainder available
for mail and interactive use.
Normally a heavily loaded web server
will not introduce significant latencies into other services even if
the network link is maxed out, but enforcing a limit can smooth things
out and lead to longer term stability.
Many people also enforce artificial
bandwidth limitations in order to ensure that they are not charged for
using too much bandwidth.
.Pp
Setting the send or receive TCP buffer to values larger than 65535 will result
in a marginal performance improvement unless both hosts support the window
scaling extension of the TCP protocol, which is controlled by the
.Va net.inet.tcp.rfc1323
sysctl.
These extensions should be enabled and the TCP buffer size should be set
to a value larger than 65536 in order to obtain good performance from
certain types of network links; specifically, gigabit WAN links and
high-latency satellite links.
RFC 1323 support is enabled by default.
.Pp
The
.Va net.inet.tcp.always_keepalive
sysctl determines whether or not the TCP implementation should attempt
to detect dead TCP connections by intermittently delivering
.Dq keepalives
on the connection.
By default, this is now enabled for all applications.
We do not recommend turning it off.
The extra network bandwidth is minimal and this feature will clean-up
stalled and long-dead connections that might not otherwise be cleaned
up.
In the past people using dialup connections often did not want to
use this feature in order to be able to retain connections across
long disconnections, but in modern day the only default that makes
sense is for the feature to be turned on.
.Pp
The
.Va net.inet.tcp.delayed_ack
TCP feature is largely misunderstood.  Historically speaking this feature
was designed to allow the acknowledgement to transmitted data to be returned
along with the response.  For example, when you type over a remote shell
the acknowledgement to the character you send can be returned along with the
data representing the echo of the character.   With delayed acks turned off
the acknowledgement may be sent in its own packet before the remote service
has a chance to echo the data it just received.  This same concept also
applies to any interactive protocol (e.g. SMTP, WWW, POP3) and can cut the
number of tiny packets flowing across the network in half.   The
.Dx
delayed-ack implementation also follows the TCP protocol rule that
at least every other packet be acknowledged even if the standard 100ms
timeout has not yet passed.  Normally the worst a delayed ack can do is
slightly delay the teardown of a connection, or slightly delay the ramp-up
of a slow-start TCP connection.  While we aren't sure we believe that
the several FAQs related to packages such as SAMBA and SQUID which advise
turning off delayed acks may be referring to the slow-start issue.
.Pp
The
.Va net.inet.tcp.inflight_enable
sysctl turns on bandwidth delay product limiting for all TCP connections.
This feature is now turned on by default and we recommend that it be
left on.
It will slightly reduce the maximum bandwidth of a connection but the
benefits of the feature in reducing packet backlogs at router constriction
points are enormous.
These benefits make it a whole lot easier for router algorithms to manage
QOS for multiple connections.
The limiting feature reduces the amount of data built up in intermediate
router and switch packet queues as well as reduces the amount of data built
up in the local host's interface queue.  With fewer packets queued up,
interactive connections, especially over slow modems, will also be able
to operate with lower round trip times.  However, note that this feature
only affects data transmission (uploading / server-side).  It does not
affect data reception (downloading).
.Pp
The system will attempt to calculate the bandwidth delay product for each
connection and limit the amount of data queued to the network to just the
amount required to maintain optimum throughput.  This feature is useful
if you are serving data over modems, GigE, or high speed WAN links (or
any other link with a high bandwidth*delay product), especially if you are
also using window scaling or have configured a large send window.
.Pp
For production use setting
.Va net.inet.tcp.inflight_min
to at least 6144 may be beneficial.  Note, however, that setting high
minimums may effectively disable bandwidth limiting depending on the link.
.Pp
Adjusting
.Va net.inet.tcp.inflight_stab
is not recommended.
This parameter defaults to 50, representing +5% fudge when calculating the
bwnd from the bw.  This fudge is on top of an additional fixed +2*maxseg
added to bwnd.  The fudge factor is required to stabilize the algorithm
at very high speeds while the fixed 2*maxseg stabilizes the algorithm at
low speeds.  If you increase this value excessive packet buffering may occur.
.Pp
The
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.*
sysctls control the port number ranges automatically bound to TCP and UDP
sockets.  There are three ranges:  A low range, a default range, and a
high range, selectable via an IP_PORTRANGE
.Fn setsockopt
call.
Most network programs use the default range which is controlled by
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.first
and
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.last ,
which defaults to 1024 and 5000 respectively.  Bound port ranges are
used for outgoing connections and it is possible to run the system out
of ports under certain circumstances.  This most commonly occurs when you are
running a heavily loaded web proxy.  The port range is not an issue
when running serves which handle mainly incoming connections such as a
normal web server, or has a limited number of outgoing connections such
as a mail relay.  For situations where you may run yourself out of
ports we recommend increasing
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.last
modestly.  A value of 10000 or 20000 or 30000 may be reasonable.  You should
also consider firewall effects when changing the port range.  Some firewalls
may block large ranges of ports (usually low-numbered ports) and expect systems
to use higher ranges of ports for outgoing connections.  For this reason
we do not recommend that
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.first
be lowered.
.Pp
The
.Va kern.ipc.somaxconn
sysctl limits the size of the listen queue for accepting new TCP connections.
The default value of 128 is typically too low for robust handling of new
connections in a heavily loaded web server environment.
For such environments,
we recommend increasing this value to 1024 or higher.
The service daemon
may itself limit the listen queue size (e.g.\&
.Xr sendmail 8 ,
apache) but will
often have a directive in its configuration file to adjust the queue size up.
Larger listen queues also do a better job of fending off denial of service
attacks.
.Pp
The
.Va kern.maxvnodes
specifies how many vnodes and related file structures the kernel will
cache.
The kernel uses a very generous default for this parameter based on
available physical memory.
You generally do not want to mess with this parameter as it directly
effects how well the kernel can cache not only file structures but also
the underlying file data.
.Pp
However, situations may crop up where caching too many vnodes can wind
up eating too much kernel memory due to filesystem resources that are
also associated with the vnodes.
You can lower this value if kernel memory use is higher than you would like.
It is, in fact, possible for the system to have more files open than the
value of this tunable, but as files are closed the system will try to
reduce the actual number of cached vnodes to match this value.
.Pp
The
.Va kern.maxfiles
sysctl determines how many open files the system supports.
The default is
typically based on available physical memory but you may need to bump
it up if you are running databases or large descriptor-heavy daemons.
The read-only
.Va kern.openfiles
sysctl may be interrogated to determine the current number of open files
on the system.
.Pp
The
.Va vm.swap_idle_enabled
sysctl is useful in large multi-user systems where you have lots of users
entering and leaving the system and lots of idle processes.
Such systems
tend to generate a great deal of continuous pressure on free memory reserves.
Turning this feature on and adjusting the swapout hysteresis (in idle
seconds) via
.Va vm.swap_idle_threshold1
and
.Va vm.swap_idle_threshold2
allows you to depress the priority of pages associated with idle processes
more quickly than the normal pageout algorithm.
This gives a helping hand
to the pageout daemon.
Do not turn this option on unless you need it,
because the tradeoff you are making is to essentially pre-page memory sooner
rather than later, eating more swap and disk bandwidth.
In a small system
this option will have a detrimental effect but in a large system that is
already doing moderate paging this option allows the VM system to stage
whole processes into and out of memory more easily.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Some aspects of the system behavior may not be tunable at runtime because
memory allocations they perform must occur early in the boot process.
To change loader tunables, you must set their values in
.Xr loader.conf 5
and reboot the system.
.Pp
.Va kern.maxusers
is automatically sized at boot based on the amount of memory available in
the system.  The value can be read (but not written) via sysctl.
.Pp
You can change this value as a loader tunable if the default resource
limits are not sufficient.
This tunable works primarily by adjusting
.Va kern.maxproc ,
so you can opt to override that instead.
It is generally easier formulate an adjustment to
.Va kern.maxproc
instead of
.Va kern.maxusers .
.Pp
.Va kern.maxproc
controls most kernel auto-scaling components.  If kernel resource limits
are not scaled high enough, setting this tunables to a higher value is
usually sufficient.
Generally speaking you will want to set this tunable to the upper limit
for the number of process threads you want the kernel to be able to handle.
The kernel may still decide to cap maxproc at a lower value if there is
insufficient ram to scale resources as desired.
.Pp
Only set this tunable if the defaults are not sufficient.
Do not use this tunable to try to trim kernel resource limits, you will
not actually save much memory by doing so and you will leave the system
more vulnerable to DOS attacks and runaway processes.
.Pp
Setting this tunable will scale the maximum number processes, pipes and
sockets, total open files the system can support, and increase mbuf
and mbuf-cluster limits.  These other elements can also be separately
overridden to fine-tune the setup.  We rcommend setting this tunable
first to create a baseline.
.Pp
Setting a high value presumes that you have enough physical memory to
support the resource utilization.  For example, your system would need
approximately 128GB of ram to reasonably support a maxproc value of
4 million (4000000).  The default maxproc given that much ram will
typically be in the 250000 range.
.Pp
Note that the PID is currently limited to 6 digits, so a system cannot
have more than a million processes operating anyway (though the aggregate
number of threads can be far greater).
And yes, there is in fact no reason why a very well-endowed system
couldn't have that many processes.
.Pp
.Va kern.nbuf
sets how many filesystem buffers the kernel should cache.
Filesystem buffers can be up to 128KB each.
UFS typically uses an 8KB blocksize while HAMMER typically uses 64KB.
The defaults usually suffice.
The cached buffers represent wired physical memory so specifying a value
that is too large can result in excessive kernel memory use, and is also
not entirely necessary since the pages backing the buffers are also
cached by the VM page cache (which does not use wired memory).
The buffer cache significantly improves the hot path for cached file
accesses and dirty data.
.Pp
The kernel reserves (128KB * nbuf) bytes of KVM.  The actual physical
memory use depends on the filesystem buffer size.
.Pp
The
.Va kern.dfldsiz
and
.Va kern.dflssiz
tunables set the default soft limits for process data and stack size
respectively.
Processes may increase these up to the hard limits by calling
.Xr setrlimit 2 .
The
.Va kern.maxdsiz ,
.Va kern.maxssiz ,
and
.Va kern.maxtsiz
tunables set the hard limits for process data, stack, and text size
respectively; processes may not exceed these limits.
The
.Va kern.sgrowsiz
tunable controls how much the stack segment will grow when a process
needs to allocate more stack.
.Pp
.Va kern.ipc.nmbclusters
and
.Va kern.ipc.nmbjclusters
may be adjusted to increase the number of network mbufs the system is
willing to allocate.
Each normal cluster represents approximately 2K of memory,
so a value of 1024 represents 2M of kernel memory reserved for network
buffers.
Each 'j' cluster is typically 4KB, so a value of 1024 represents 4M of
kernel memory.
You can do a simple calculation to figure out how many you need but
keep in mind that tcp buffer sizing is now more dynamic than it used to
be.
.Pp
The defaults usually suffice but you may want to bump it up on service-heavy
machines.
Modern machines often need a large number of mbufs to operate services
efficiently, values of 65536, even upwards of 262144 or more are common.
If you are running a server, it is better to be generous than to be frugal.
Remember the memory calculation though.
.Pp
Under no circumstances
should you specify an arbitrarily high value for this parameter, it could
lead to a boot-time crash.
The
.Fl m
option to
.Xr netstat 1
may be used to observe network cluster use.
.Sh KERNEL CONFIG TUNING
There are a number of kernel options that you may have to fiddle with in
a large-scale system.
In order to change these options you need to be
able to compile a new kernel from source.
The
.Xr config 8
manual page and the handbook are good starting points for learning how to
do this.
Generally speaking, removing options to trim the size of the kernel
is not going to save very much memory on a modern system.
In the grand scheme of things, saving a megabyte or two is in the noise
on a system that likely has multiple gigabytes of memory.
.Pp
If your motherboard is AHCI-capable then we strongly recommend turning
on AHCI mode in the BIOS if it is not already the default.
.Sh CPU, MEMORY, DISK, NETWORK
The type of tuning you do depends heavily on where your system begins to
bottleneck as load increases.
If your system runs out of CPU (idle times
are perpetually 0%) then you need to consider upgrading the CPU or moving to
an SMP motherboard (multiple CPU's), or perhaps you need to revisit the
programs that are causing the load and try to optimize them.
If your system
is paging to swap a lot you need to consider adding more memory.
If your
system is saturating the disk you typically see high CPU idle times and
total disk saturation.
.Xr systat 1
can be used to monitor this.
There are many solutions to saturated disks:
increasing memory for caching, mirroring disks, distributing operations across
several machines, and so forth.
.Pp
Finally, you might run out of network suds.
Optimize the network path
as much as possible.
If you are operating a machine as a router you may need to
setup a
.Xr pf 4
firewall (also see
.Xr firewall 7 .
.Dx
has a very good fair-share queueing algorithm for QOS in
.Xr pf 4 .
.Sh SOURCE OF KERNEL MEMORY USAGE
The primary sources of kernel memory usage are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va kern.maxvnodes"
.It Va kern.maxvnodes
The maximum number of cached vnodes in the system.
These can eat quite a bit of kernel memory, primarily due to auxiliary
structures tracked by the HAMMER filesystem.
It is relatively easy to configure a smaller value, but we do not
recommend reducing this parameter below 100000.
Smaller values directly impact the number of discrete files the
kernel can cache data for at once.
.It Va kern.ipc.nmbclusters , Va kern.ipc.nmbjclusters
Calculate approximately 2KB per normal cluster and 4KB per jumbo
cluster.
Do not make these values too low or you risk deadlocking the network
stack.
.It Va kern.nbuf
The number of filesystem buffers managed by the kernel.
The kernel wires the underlying cached VM pages, typically 8KB (UFS) or
64KB (HAMMER) per buffer.
.It swap/swapcache
Swap memory requires approximately 1MB of physical ram for each 1GB
of swap space.
When swapcache is used, additional memory may be required to keep
VM objects around longer (only really reducable by reducing the
value of
.Va kern.maxvnodes
which you can do post-boot if you desire).
.It tmpfs
Tmpfs is very useful but keep in mind that while the file data itself
is backed by swap, the meta-data (the directory topology) requires
wired kernel memory.
.It mmu page tables
Even though the underlying data pages themselves can be paged to swap,
the page tables are usually wired into memory.
This can create problems when a large number of processes are mmap()ing
very large files.
Sometimes turning on
.Va machdep.pmap_mmu_optimize
suffices to reduce overhead.
Page table kernel memory use can be observed by using 'vmstat -z'
.It Va kern.ipc.shm_use_phys
It is sometimes necessary to force shared memory to use physical memory
when running a large database which uses shared memory to implement its
own data caching.
The use of sysv shared memory in this regard allows the database to
distinguish between data which it knows it can access instantly (i.e.
without even having to page-in from swap) verses data which it might require
and I/O to fetch.
.Pp
If you use this feature be very careful with regards to the database's
shared memory configuration as you will be wiring the memory.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netstat 1 ,
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr dm 4 ,
.Xr dummynet 4 ,
.Xr nata 4 ,
.Xr pf 4 ,
.Xr login.conf 5 ,
.Xr pf.conf 5 ,
.Xr rc.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr firewall 7 ,
.Xr hier 7 ,
.Xr boot 8 ,
.Xr ccdconfig 8 ,
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr disklabel 8 ,
.Xr fsck 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr ipfw 8 ,
.Xr loader 8 ,
.Xr mount 8 ,
.Xr newfs 8 ,
.Xr route 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr tunefs 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page was inherited from
.Fx
and first appeared in
.Fx 4.3 ,
May 2001.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
manual page was originally written by
.An Matthew Dillon .
