.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006, 2007
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 17, 2012
.Dt VKERNEL 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vkernel ,
.Nm vcd ,
.Nm vkd ,
.Nm vke
.Nd virtual kernel architecture
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "platform vkernel   # for 32 bit vkernels"
.Cd "platform vkernel64 # for 64 bit vkernels"
.Cd "device vcd"
.Cd "device vkd"
.Cd "device vke"
.Pp
.Pa /var/vkernel/boot/kernel/kernel
.Op Fl hsUv
.Op Fl c Ar file
.Op Fl e Ar name Ns = Ns Li value : Ns Ar name Ns = Ns Li value : Ns ...
.Op Fl i Ar file
.Op Fl I Ar interface Ns Op Ar :address1 Ns Oo Ar :address2 Oc Ns Oo Ar /netmask Oc
.Op Fl l Ar cpulock
.Op Fl m Ar size
.Op Fl n Ar numcpus Ns Op Ar :lbits Ns Oo Ar :cbits Oc
.Op Fl p Ar pidfile
.Op Fl r Ar file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
architecture allows for running
.Dx
kernels in userland.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl m Ar size"
.It Fl c Ar file
Specify a readonly CD-ROM image
.Ar file
to be used by the kernel, with the first
.Fl c
option defining
.Li vcd0 ,
the second one
.Li vcd1 ,
and so on.
The first
.Fl r
or
.Fl c
option specified on the command line will be the boot disk.
The CD9660 filesystem is assumed when booting from this media.
.It Fl e Ar name Ns = Ns Li value : Ns Ar name Ns = Ns Li value : Ns ...
Specify an environment to be used by the kernel.
This option can be specified more than once.
.It Fl h
Shows a list of available options, each with a short description.
.It Fl i Ar file
Specify a memory image
.Ar file
to be used by the virtual kernel.
If no
.Fl i
option is given, the kernel will generate a name of the form
.Pa /var/vkernel/memimg.XXXXXX ,
with the trailing
.Ql X Ns s
being replaced by a sequential number, e.g.\&
.Pa memimg.000001 .
.It Fl I Ar interface Ns Op Ar :address1 Ns Oo Ar :address2 Oc Ns Oo Ar /netmask Oc
Create a virtual network device, with the first
.Fl I
option defining
.Li vke0 ,
the second one
.Li vke1 ,
and so on.
.Pp
The
.Ar interface
argument is the name of a
.Xr tap 4
device node or the path to a
.Xr vknetd 8
socket.
The
.Pa /dev/
path prefix does not have to be specified and will be automatically prepended
for a device node.
Specifying
.Cm auto
will pick the first unused
.Xr tap 4
device.
.Pp
The
.Ar address1
and
.Ar address2
arguments are the IP addresses of the
.Xr tap 4
and
.Nm vke
interfaces.
Optionally,
.Ar address1
may be of the form
.Li bridge Ns Em X
in which case the
.Xr tap 4
interface is added to the specified
.Xr bridge 4
interface.
The
.Nm vke
address is not assigned until the interface is brought up in the guest.
.Pp
The
.Ar netmask
argument applies to all interfaces for which an address is specified.
.Pp
When running multiple vkernels it is often more convenient to simply
connect to a
.Xr vknetd 8
socket and let vknetd deal with the tap and/or bridge.  An example of
this would be '/var/run/vknet:0.0.0.0:10.2.0.2/16'.
.It Fl l Ar cpulock
Specify which, if any, real CPUs to lock virtual CPUs to.
.Ar cpulock
is one of
.Cm any ,
.Cm map Ns Op Ns , Ns Ar startCPU ,
or
.Ar CPU .
.Pp
.Cm any
does not map virtual CPUs to real CPUs.
This is the default.
.Pp
.Cm map Ns Op Ns , Ns Ar startCPU
maps each virtual CPU to a real CPU starting with real CPU 0 or
.Ar startCPU
if specified.
.Pp
.Ar CPU
locks all virtual CPUs to the real CPU specified by
.Ar CPU .
.It Fl m Ar size
Specify the amount of memory to be used by the kernel in bytes,
.Cm K
.Pq kilobytes ,
.Cm M
.Pq megabytes
or
.Cm G
.Pq gigabytes .
Lowercase versions of
.Cm K , M ,
and
.Cm G
are allowed.
.It Fl n Ar numcpus Ns Op Ar :lbits Ns Oo Ar :cbits Oc
.Ar numcpus
specifies the number of CPUs you wish to emulate.
Up to 16 CPUs are supported.
The virtual kernel must be built with
.Cd options SMP
to use this option and will default to 2 CPUs unless otherwise specified.
.Ar lbits
specifies the number of bits within APICID(=CPUID) needed for representing
the logical ID.
Controls the number of threads/core (0bits - 1 thread, 1bit - 2 threads).
This parameter is optional (mandatory only if
.Ar cbits
is specified).
.Ar cbits
specifies the number of bits within APICID(=CPUID) needed for representing
the core ID.
Controls the number of core/package (0bits - 1 core, 1bit - 2 cores).
This parameter is optional.
.It Fl p Ar pidfile
Specify a pidfile in which to store the process ID.
Scripts can use this file to locate the vkernel pid for the purpose of
shutting down or killing it.
.Pp
The vkernel will hold a lock on the pidfile while running.
Scripts may test for the lock to determine if the pidfile is valid or
stale so as to avoid accidentally killing a random process.
Something like '/usr/bin/lockf -ks -t 0 pidfile echo -n' may be used
to test the lock.
A non-zero exit code indicates that the pidfile represents a running
vkernel.
.Pp
An error is issued and the vkernel exits if this file cannot be opened for
writing or if it is already locked by an active vkernel process.
.It Fl r Ar file
Specify a R/W disk image
.Ar file
to be used by the kernel, with the first
.Fl r
option defining
.Li vkd0 ,
the second one
.Li vkd1 ,
and so on.
The first
.Fl r
or
.Fl c
option specified on the command line will be the boot disk.
.It Fl s
Boot into single-user mode.
.It Fl U
Enable writing to kernel memory and module loading.
By default, those are disabled for security reasons.
.It Fl v
Turn on verbose booting.
.El
.Sh DEVICES
A number of virtual device drivers exist to supplement the virtual kernel.
.Ss Disk device
The
.Nm vkd
driver allows for up to 16
.Xr vn 4
based disk devices.
The root device will be
.Li vkd0
(see
.Sx EXAMPLES
for further information on how to prepare a root image).
.Ss CD-ROM device
The
.Nm vcd
driver allows for up to 16 virtual CD-ROM devices.
Basically this is a read only
.Nm vkd
device with a block size of 2048.
.Ss Network interface
The
.Nm vke
driver supports up to 16 virtual network interfaces which are associated with
.Xr tap 4
devices on the host.
For each
.Nm vke
device, the per-interface read only
.Xr sysctl 3
variable
.Va hw.vke Ns Em X Ns Va .tap_unit
holds the unit number of the associated
.Xr tap 4
device.
.Sh SIGNALS
The virtual kernel only enables
.Dv SIGQUIT
and
.Dv SIGTERM
while operating in regular console mode.
Sending
.Ql \&^\e
.Pq Dv SIGQUIT
to the virtual kernel causes the virtual kernel to enter its internal
.Xr ddb 4
debugger and re-enable all other terminal signals.
Sending
.Dv SIGTERM
to the virtual kernel triggers a clean shutdown by passing a
.Dv SIGUSR2
to the virtual kernel's
.Xr init 8
process.
.Sh DEBUGGING
It is possible to directly gdb the virtual kernel's process.
It is recommended that you do a
.Ql handle SIGSEGV noprint
to ignore page faults processed by the virtual kernel itself and
.Ql handle SIGUSR1 noprint
to ignore signals used for simulating inter-processor interrupts (SMP build
only).
.Sh PROFILING
To compile a vkernel with profiling support, the
.Va CONFIGARGS
variable needs to be used to pass
.Fl p
to
.Xr config 8 .
.Bd -literal
cd /usr/src
make -DNO_MODULES CONFIGARGS=-p buildkernel KERNCONF=VKERNEL
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".It Pa /sys/config/VKERNEL" -compact
.It Pa /sys/config/VKERNEL
.It Pa /sys/config/VKERNEL64
.El
.Pp
Per architecture
.Nm
configuration files, for
.Xr config 8 .
.Sh CONFIGURATION FILES
Your virtual kernel is a complete
.Dx
system, but you might not want to run all the services a normal kernel runs.
Here is what a typical virtual kernel's
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file looks like, with some additional possibilities commented out.
.Bd -literal
hostname="vkernel"
network_interfaces="lo0 vke0"
ifconfig_vke0="DHCP"
sendmail_enable="NO"
#syslog_enable="NO"
blanktime="NO"
.Ed
.Sh DISKLESS OPERATION
To boot a
.Nm
from a NFS root, a number of tunables need to be set:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va boot.netif.ip
IP address to be set in the vkernel interface.
.It Va boot.netif.netmask
Netmask for the IP to be set.
.It Va boot.netif.name
Network interface name inside the vkernel.
.It Va boot.nfsroot.server
Host running
.Xr nfsd 8 .
.It Va boot.nfsroot.path
Host path where a world and distribution
targets are properly installed.
.El
.Pp
See an example on how to boot a diskless
.Nm
in the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A couple of steps are necessary in order to prepare the system to build and
run a virtual kernel.
.Ss Setting up the filesystem
The
.Nm
architecture needs a number of files which reside in
.Pa /var/vkernel .
Since these files tend to get rather big and the
.Pa /var
partition is usually of limited size, we recommend the directory to be
created in the
.Pa /home
partition with a link to it in
.Pa /var :
.Bd -literal
mkdir -p /home/var.vkernel/boot
ln -s /home/var.vkernel /var/vkernel
.Ed
.Pp
Next, a filesystem image to be used by the virtual kernel has to be
created and populated (assuming world has been built previously).
If the image is created on a UFS filesystem you might want to pre-zero it.
On a HAMMER filesystem you should just truncate-extend to the image size
as HAMMER does not re-use data blocks already present in the file.
.Bd -literal
vnconfig -c -S 2g -T vn0 /var/vkernel/rootimg.01
disklabel -r -w vn0s0 auto
disklabel -e vn0s0	# add `a' partition with fstype `4.2BSD'
newfs /dev/vn0s0a
mount /dev/vn0s0a /mnt
cd /usr/src
make installworld DESTDIR=/mnt
cd etc
make distribution DESTDIR=/mnt
echo '/dev/vkd0s0a	/	ufs	rw	1  1' >/mnt/etc/fstab
echo 'proc		/proc	procfs	rw	0  0' >>/mnt/etc/fstab
.Ed
.Pp
Edit
.Pa /mnt/etc/ttys
and replace the
.Li console
entry with the following line and turn off all other gettys.
.Bd -literal
console	"/usr/libexec/getty Pc"		cons25	on  secure
.Ed
.Pp
Replace
.Li \&Pc
with
.Li al.Pc
if you would like to automatically log in as root.
.Pp
Then, unmount the disk.
.Bd -literal
umount /mnt
vnconfig -u vn0
.Ed
.Ss Compiling the virtual kernel
In order to compile a virtual kernel use the
.Li VKERNEL
kernel configuration file residing in
.Pa /sys/config
(or a configuration file derived thereof):
.Bd -literal
cd /usr/src
make -DNO_MODULES buildkernel KERNCONF=VKERNEL
make -DNO_MODULES installkernel KERNCONF=VKERNEL DESTDIR=/var/vkernel
.Ed
.Ss Enabling virtual kernel operation
A special
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Va vm.vkernel_enable ,
must be set to enable
.Nm
operation:
.Bd -literal
sysctl vm.vkernel_enable=1
.Ed
.Ss Configuring the network on the host system
In order to access a network interface of the host system from the
.Nm ,
you must add the interface to a
.Xr bridge 4
device which will then be passed to the
.Fl I
option:
.Bd -literal
kldload if_bridge.ko
kldload if_tap.ko
ifconfig bridge0 create
ifconfig bridge0 addm re0	# assuming re0 is the host's interface
ifconfig bridge0 up
.Ed
.Ss Running the kernel
Finally, the virtual kernel can be run:
.Bd -literal
cd /var/vkernel
\&./boot/kernel/kernel -m 64m -r rootimg.01 -I auto:bridge0
.Ed
.Pp
You can issue the
.Xr reboot 8 ,
.Xr halt 8 ,
or
.Xr shutdown 8
commands from inside a virtual kernel.
After doing a clean shutdown the
.Xr reboot 8
command will re-exec the virtual kernel binary while the other two will
cause the virtual kernel to exit.
.Ss Diskless operation
Booting a
.Nm
with a
.Xr vknetd 8
network configuration:
.Bd -literal
\&./boot/kernel/kernel -m 64m -m -i memimg.0000 -I /var/run/vknet
	-e boot.netif.ip=172.1.0.4
	-e boot.netif.netmask=255.255.0.0
	-e boot.netif.name=vke0
	-e boot.nfsroot.server=172.1.0.1
	-e boot.nfsroot.path=/home/vkernel/vkdiskless
.Ed
.Sh BUILDING THE WORLD UNDER A VKERNEL
The virtual kernel platform does not have all the header files expected
by a world build, so the easiest thing to do right now is to specify a
pc32 (in a 32 bit vkernel) or pc64 (in a 64 bit vkernel) target when
building the world under a virtual kernel, like this:
.Bd -literal
vkernel# make MACHINE_PLATFORM=pc32 buildworld
vkernel# make MACHINE_PLATFORM=pc32 installworld
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vknet 1 ,
.Xr bridge 4 ,
.Xr tap 4 ,
.Xr vn 4 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr build 7 ,
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr disklabel 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr vknetd 8 ,
.Xr vnconfig 8
.Rs
.%A Aggelos Economopoulos
.%D March 2007
.%T "A Peek at the DragonFly Virtual Kernel"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
Virtual kernels were introduced in
.Dx 1.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An Matt Dillon
thought up and implemented the
.Nm
architecture and wrote the
.Nm vkd
device driver.
.An Sepherosa Ziehau
wrote the
.Nm vke
device driver.
This manual page was written by
.An Sascha Wildner .
