.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH BIO_ctrl 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
BIO_ctrl, BIO_callback_ctrl, BIO_ptr_ctrl, BIO_int_ctrl, BIO_reset,
BIO_seek, BIO_tell, BIO_flush, BIO_eof, BIO_set_close, BIO_get_close,
BIO_pending, BIO_wpending, BIO_ctrl_pending, BIO_ctrl_wpending,
BIO_get_info_callback, BIO_set_info_callback \- BIO control operations
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/bio.h>
.Ve
.Vb 4
\& long BIO_ctrl(BIO *bp,int cmd,long larg,void *parg);
\& long BIO_callback_ctrl(BIO *b, int cmd, void (*fp)(struct bio_st *, int, const char *, int, long, long));
\& char * BIO_ptr_ctrl(BIO *bp,int cmd,long larg);
\& long BIO_int_ctrl(BIO *bp,int cmd,long larg,int iarg);
.Ve
.Vb 11
\& int BIO_reset(BIO *b);
\& int BIO_seek(BIO *b, int ofs);
\& int BIO_tell(BIO *b);
\& int BIO_flush(BIO *b);
\& int BIO_eof(BIO *b);
\& int BIO_set_close(BIO *b,long flag);
\& int BIO_get_close(BIO *b);
\& int BIO_pending(BIO *b);
\& int BIO_wpending(BIO *b);
\& size_t BIO_ctrl_pending(BIO *b);
\& size_t BIO_ctrl_wpending(BIO *b);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& int BIO_get_info_callback(BIO *b,bio_info_cb **cbp);
\& int BIO_set_info_callback(BIO *b,bio_info_cb *cb);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& typedef void bio_info_cb(BIO *b, int oper, const char *ptr, int arg1, long arg2, long arg3);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fIBIO_ctrl()\fR, \fIBIO_callback_ctrl()\fR, \fIBIO_ptr_ctrl()\fR and \fIBIO_int_ctrl()\fR
are BIO \*(L"control\*(R" operations taking arguments of various types.
These functions are not normally called directly, various macros
are used instead. The standard macros are described below, macros
specific to a particular type of BIO are described in the specific
BIOs manual page as well as any special features of the standard
calls.
.PP
\fIBIO_reset()\fR typically resets a BIO to some initial state, in the case
of file related BIOs for example it rewinds the file pointer to the
start of the file.
.PP
\fIBIO_seek()\fR resets a file related BIO's (that is file descriptor and
FILE BIOs) file position pointer to \fBofs\fR bytes from start of file.
.PP
\fIBIO_tell()\fR returns the current file position of a file related BIO.
.PP
\fIBIO_flush()\fR normally writes out any internally buffered data, in some
cases it is used to signal EOF and that no more data will be written.
.PP
\fIBIO_eof()\fR returns 1 if the BIO has read EOF, the precise meaning of
\*(L"EOF\*(R" varies according to the BIO type.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_close()\fR sets the BIO \fBb\fR close flag to \fBflag\fR. \fBflag\fR can
take the value BIO_CLOSE or BIO_NOCLOSE. Typically BIO_CLOSE is used
in a source/sink BIO to indicate that the underlying I/O stream should
be closed when the BIO is freed.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_close()\fR returns the BIOs close flag.
.PP
\fIBIO_pending()\fR, \fIBIO_ctrl_pending()\fR, \fIBIO_wpending()\fR and \fIBIO_ctrl_wpending()\fR
return the number of pending characters in the BIOs read and write buffers.
Not all BIOs support these calls. \fIBIO_ctrl_pending()\fR and \fIBIO_ctrl_wpending()\fR
return a size_t type and are functions, \fIBIO_pending()\fR and \fIBIO_wpending()\fR are
macros which call \fIBIO_ctrl()\fR.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
\fIBIO_reset()\fR normally returns 1 for success and 0 or \-1 for failure. File
BIOs are an exception, they return 0 for success and \-1 for failure.
.PP
\fIBIO_seek()\fR and \fIBIO_tell()\fR both return the current file position on success
and \-1 for failure, except file BIOs which for \fIBIO_seek()\fR always return 0
for success and \-1 for failure.
.PP
\fIBIO_flush()\fR returns 1 for success and 0 or \-1 for failure.
.PP
\fIBIO_eof()\fR returns 1 if EOF has been reached 0 otherwise.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_close()\fR always returns 1.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_close()\fR returns the close flag value: BIO_CLOSE or BIO_NOCLOSE.
.PP
\fIBIO_pending()\fR, \fIBIO_ctrl_pending()\fR, \fIBIO_wpending()\fR and \fIBIO_ctrl_wpending()\fR
return the amount of pending data.
.SH "NOTES"
\fIBIO_flush()\fR, because it can write data may return 0 or \-1 indicating
that the call should be retried later in a similar manner to \fIBIO_write()\fR. 
The \fIBIO_should_retry()\fR call should be used and appropriate action taken
is the call fails.
.PP
The return values of \fIBIO_pending()\fR and \fIBIO_wpending()\fR may not reliably
determine the amount of pending data in all cases. For example in the
case of a file BIO some data may be available in the FILE structures
internal buffers but it is not possible to determine this in a
portably way. For other types of BIO they may not be supported.
.PP
Filter BIOs if they do not internally handle a particular \fIBIO_ctrl()\fR
operation usually pass the operation to the next BIO in the chain.
This often means there is no need to locate the required BIO for
a particular operation, it can be called on a chain and it will
be automatically passed to the relevant BIO. However this can cause
unexpected results: for example no current filter BIOs implement
\fIBIO_seek()\fR, but this may still succeed if the chain ends in a FILE
or file descriptor BIO.
.PP
Source/sink BIOs return an 0 if they do not recognize the \fIBIO_ctrl()\fR
operation.
.SH "BUGS"
Some of the return values are ambiguous and care should be taken. In
particular a return value of 0 can be returned if an operation is not
supported, if an error occurred, if EOF has not been reached and in
the case of \fIBIO_seek()\fR on a file BIO for a successful operation. 
.SH "SEE ALSO"
TBA

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "BIO_ctrl 3"
.IX Name "BIO_ctrl, BIO_callback_ctrl, BIO_ptr_ctrl, BIO_int_ctrl, BIO_reset,
BIO_seek, BIO_tell, BIO_flush, BIO_eof, BIO_set_close, BIO_get_close,
BIO_pending, BIO_wpending, BIO_ctrl_pending, BIO_ctrl_wpending,
BIO_get_info_callback, BIO_set_info_callback - BIO control operations"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "BUGS"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

