.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH BIO_s_connect 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
BIO_s_connect, BIO_set_conn_hostname, BIO_set_conn_port,
BIO_set_conn_ip, BIO_set_conn_int_port, BIO_get_conn_hostname,
BIO_get_conn_port, BIO_get_conn_ip, BIO_get_conn_int_port,
BIO_set_nbio, BIO_do_connect \- connect BIO
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/bio.h>
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& BIO_METHOD * BIO_s_connect(void);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& BIO *BIO_new_connect(char *name);
.Ve
.Vb 8
\& long BIO_set_conn_hostname(BIO *b, char *name);
\& long BIO_set_conn_port(BIO *b, char *port);
\& long BIO_set_conn_ip(BIO *b, char *ip);
\& long BIO_set_conn_int_port(BIO *b, char *port);
\& char *BIO_get_conn_hostname(BIO *b);
\& char *BIO_get_conn_port(BIO *b);
\& char *BIO_get_conn_ip(BIO *b, dummy);
\& long BIO_get_conn_int_port(BIO *b, int port);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& long BIO_set_nbio(BIO *b, long n);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int BIO_do_connect(BIO *b);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fIBIO_s_connect()\fR returns the connect BIO method. This is a wrapper
round the platform's TCP/IP socket connection routines.
.PP
Using connect BIOs, TCP/IP connections can be made and data
transferred using only BIO routines. In this way any platform
specific operations are hidden by the BIO abstraction.
.PP
Read and write operations on a connect BIO will perform I/O
on the underlying connection. If no connection is established
and the port and hostname (see below) is set up properly then
a connection is established first.
.PP
Connect BIOs support \fIBIO_puts()\fR but not \fIBIO_gets()\fR.
.PP
If the close flag is set on a connect BIO then any active
connection is shutdown and the socket closed when the BIO
is freed.
.PP
Calling \fIBIO_reset()\fR on a connect BIO will close any active
connection and reset the BIO into a state where it can connect
to the same host again.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_fd()\fR places the underlying socket in \fBc\fR if it is not NULL,
it also returns the socket . If \fBc\fR is not NULL it should be of
type (int *).
.PP
\fIBIO_set_conn_hostname()\fR uses the string \fBname\fR to set the hostname.
The hostname can be an IP address. The hostname can also include the
port in the form hostname:port . It is also acceptable to use the
form \*(L"hostname/any/other/path\*(R" or \*(L"hostname:port/any/other/path\*(R".
.PP
\fIBIO_set_conn_port()\fR sets the port to \fBport\fR. \fBport\fR can be the
numerical form or a string such as \*(L"http\*(R". A string will be looked
up first using \fIgetservbyname()\fR on the host platform but if that
fails a standard table of port names will be used. Currently the
list is http, telnet, socks, https, ssl, ftp, gopher and wais.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_conn_ip()\fR sets the IP address to \fBip\fR using binary form,
that is four bytes specifying the IP address in big-endian form.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_conn_int_port()\fR sets the port using \fBport\fR. \fBport\fR should
be of type (int *).
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_hostname()\fR returns the hostname of the connect BIO or
NULL if the BIO is initialized but no hostname is set.
This return value is an internal pointer which should not be modified.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_port()\fR returns the port as a string.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_ip()\fR returns the IP address in binary form.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_int_port()\fR returns the port as an int.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_nbio()\fR sets the non blocking I/O flag to \fBn\fR. If \fBn\fR is
zero then blocking I/O is set. If \fBn\fR is 1 then non blocking I/O
is set. Blocking I/O is the default. The call to \fIBIO_set_nbio()\fR
should be made before the connection is established because 
non blocking I/O is set during the connect process.
.PP
\fIBIO_new_connect()\fR combines \fIBIO_new()\fR and \fIBIO_set_conn_hostname()\fR into
a single call: that is it creates a new connect BIO with \fBname\fR.
.PP
\fIBIO_do_connect()\fR attempts to connect the supplied BIO. It returns 1
if the connection was established successfully. A zero or negative
value is returned if the connection could not be established, the
call \fIBIO_should_retry()\fR should be used for non blocking connect BIOs
to determine if the call should be retried.
.SH "NOTES"
If blocking I/O is set then a non positive return value from any
I/O call is caused by an error condition, although a zero return
will normally mean that the connection was closed.
.PP
If the port name is supplied as part of the host name then this will
override any value set with \fIBIO_set_conn_port()\fR. This may be undesirable
if the application does not wish to allow connection to arbitrary
ports. This can be avoided by checking for the presence of the \*(L':\*(R'
character in the passed hostname and either indicating an error or
truncating the string at that point.
.PP
The values returned by \fIBIO_get_conn_hostname()\fR, \fIBIO_get_conn_port()\fR,
\fIBIO_get_conn_ip()\fR and \fIBIO_get_conn_int_port()\fR are updated when a
connection attempt is made. Before any connection attempt the values
returned are those set by the application itself.
.PP
Applications do not have to call \fIBIO_do_connect()\fR but may wish to do
so to separate the connection process from other I/O processing.
.PP
If non blocking I/O is set then retries will be requested as appropriate.
.PP
It addition to \fIBIO_should_read()\fR and \fIBIO_should_write()\fR it is also
possible for \fIBIO_should_io_special()\fR to be true during the initial
connection process with the reason BIO_RR_CONNECT. If this is returned
then this is an indication that a connection attempt would block,
the application should then take appropriate action to wait until
the underlying socket has connected and retry the call.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_conn_hostname()\fR, \fIBIO_set_conn_port()\fR, \fIBIO_set_conn_ip()\fR,
\fIBIO_set_conn_int_port()\fR, \fIBIO_get_conn_hostname()\fR, \fIBIO_get_conn_port()\fR,
\fIBIO_get_conn_ip()\fR, \fIBIO_get_conn_int_port()\fR, \fIBIO_set_nbio()\fR and
\fIBIO_do_connect()\fR are macros.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
\fIBIO_s_connect()\fR returns the connect BIO method.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_fd()\fR returns the socket or \-1 if the BIO has not
been initialized.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_conn_hostname()\fR, \fIBIO_set_conn_port()\fR, \fIBIO_set_conn_ip()\fR and
\fIBIO_set_conn_int_port()\fR always return 1.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_hostname()\fR returns the connected hostname or NULL is
none was set.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_port()\fR returns a string representing the connected
port or NULL if not set.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_ip()\fR returns a pointer to the connected IP address in
binary form or all zeros if not set.
.PP
\fIBIO_get_conn_int_port()\fR returns the connected port or 0 if none was
set.
.PP
\fIBIO_set_nbio()\fR always returns 1.
.PP
\fIBIO_do_connect()\fR returns 1 if the connection was successfully
established and 0 or \-1 if the connection failed.
.SH "EXAMPLE"
This is example connects to a webserver on the local host and attempts
to retrieve a page and copy the result to standard output.
.PP
.Vb 19
\& BIO *cbio, *out;
\& int len;
\& char tmpbuf[1024];
\& ERR_load_crypto_strings();
\& cbio = BIO_new_connect("localhost:http");
\& out = BIO_new_fp(stdout, BIO_NOCLOSE);
\& if(BIO_do_connect(cbio) <= 0) {
\&        fprintf(stderr, "Error connecting to server\en");
\&        ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
\&        /* whatever ... */
\&        }
\& BIO_puts(cbio, "GET / HTTP/1.0\en\en");
\& for(;;) {      
\&        len = BIO_read(cbio, tmpbuf, 1024);
\&        if(len <= 0) break;
\&        BIO_write(out, tmpbuf, len);
\& }
\& BIO_free(cbio);
\& BIO_free(out);
.Ve
.SH "SEE ALSO"
TBA

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "BIO_s_connect 3"
.IX Name "BIO_s_connect, BIO_set_conn_hostname, BIO_set_conn_port,
BIO_set_conn_ip, BIO_set_conn_int_port, BIO_get_conn_hostname,
BIO_get_conn_port, BIO_get_conn_ip, BIO_get_conn_int_port,
BIO_set_nbio, BIO_do_connect - connect BIO"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Header "EXAMPLE"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

