.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH d2i_X509 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
d2i_X509, i2d_X509, d2i_X509_bio, d2i_X509_fp, i2d_X509_bio,
i2d_X509_fp \- X509 encode and decode functions
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/x509.h>
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& X509 *d2i_X509(X509 **px, unsigned char **in, int len);
\& int i2d_X509(X509 *x, unsigned char **out);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& X509 *d2i_X509_bio(BIO *bp, X509 **x);
\& X509 *d2i_X509_fp(FILE *fp, X509 **x);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& int i2d_X509_bio(X509 *x, BIO *bp);
\& int i2d_X509_fp(X509 *x, FILE *fp);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The X509 encode and decode routines encode and parse an
\fBX509\fR structure, which represents an X509 certificate.
.PP
\fId2i_X509()\fR attempts to decode \fBlen\fR bytes at \fB*out\fR. If 
successful a pointer to the \fBX509\fR structure is returned. If an error
occurred then \fBNULL\fR is returned. If \fBpx\fR is not \fBNULL\fR then the
returned structure is written to \fB*px\fR. If \fB*px\fR is not \fBNULL\fR
then it is assumed that \fB*px\fR contains a valid \fBX509\fR
structure and an attempt is made to reuse it. If the call is
successful \fB*out\fR is incremented to the byte following the
parsed data.
.PP
\fIi2d_X509()\fR encodes the structure pointed to by \fBx\fR into DER format.
If \fBout\fR is not \fBNULL\fR is writes the DER encoded data to the buffer
at \fB*out\fR, and increments it to point after the data just written.
If the return value is negative an error occurred, otherwise it
returns the length of the encoded data. 
.PP
For OpenSSL 0.9.7 and later if \fB*out\fR is \fBNULL\fR memory will be
allocated for a buffer and the encoded data written to it. In this
case \fB*out\fR is not incremented and it points to the start of the
data just written.
.PP
\fId2i_X509_bio()\fR is similar to \fId2i_X509()\fR except it attempts
to parse data from BIO \fBbp\fR.
.PP
\fId2i_X509_fp()\fR is similar to \fId2i_X509()\fR except it attempts
to parse data from FILE pointer \fBfp\fR.
.PP
\fIi2d_X509_bio()\fR is similar to \fIi2d_X509()\fR except it writes
the encoding of the structure \fBx\fR to BIO \fBbp\fR and it
returns 1 for success and 0 for failure.
.PP
\fIi2d_X509_fp()\fR is similar to \fIi2d_X509()\fR except it writes
the encoding of the structure \fBx\fR to BIO \fBbp\fR and it
returns 1 for success and 0 for failure.
.SH "NOTES"
The letters \fBi\fR and \fBd\fR in for example \fBi2d_X509\fR stand for
\*(L"internal\*(R" (that is an internal C structure) and \*(L"DER\*(R". So that
\fBi2d_X509\fR converts from internal to DER.
.PP
The functions can also understand \fBBER\fR forms.
.PP
The actual X509 structure passed to \fIi2d_X509()\fR must be a valid
populated \fBX509\fR structure it can \fBnot\fR simply be fed with an
empty structure such as that returned by \fIX509_new()\fR.
.PP
The encoded data is in binary form and may contain embedded zeroes.
Therefore any FILE pointers or BIOs should be opened in binary mode.
Functions such as \fBstrlen()\fR will \fBnot\fR return the correct length
of the encoded structure.
.PP
The ways that \fB*in\fR and \fB*out\fR are incremented after the operation
can trap the unwary. See the \fBWARNINGS\fR section for some common
errors.
.PP
The reason for the auto increment behaviour is to reflect a typical
usage of ASN1 functions: after one structure is encoded or decoded
another will processed after it.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
Allocate and encode the DER encoding of an X509 structure:
.PP
.Vb 2
\& int len;
\& unsigned char *buf, *p;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& len = i2d_X509(x, NULL);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& buf = OPENSSL_malloc(len);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& if (buf == NULL)
\&        /* error */
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& p = buf;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& i2d_X509(x, &p);
.Ve
If you are using OpenSSL 0.9.7 or later then this can be
simplified to:
.PP
.Vb 2
\& int len;
\& unsigned char *buf;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& buf = NULL;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& len = i2d_X509(x, &buf);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& if (len < 0)
\&        /* error */
.Ve
Attempt to decode a buffer:
.PP
.Vb 1
\& X509 *x;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& unsigned char *buf, *p;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int len;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& /* Something to setup buf and len */
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& p = buf;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& x = d2i_X509(NULL, &p, len);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& if (x == NULL)
\&    /* Some error */
.Ve
Alternative technique:
.PP
.Vb 1
\& X509 *x;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& unsigned char *buf, *p;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int len;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& /* Something to setup buf and len */
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& p = buf;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& x = NULL;
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& if(!d2i_X509(&x, &p, len))
\&    /* Some error */
.Ve
.SH "WARNINGS"
The use of temporary variable is mandatory. A common
mistake is to attempt to use a buffer directly as follows:
.PP
.Vb 2
\& int len;
\& unsigned char *buf;
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& len = i2d_X509(x, NULL);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& buf = OPENSSL_malloc(len);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& if (buf == NULL)
\&        /* error */
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& i2d_X509(x, &buf);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& /* Other stuff ... */
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& OPENSSL_free(buf);
.Ve
This code will result in \fBbuf\fR apparently containing garbage because
it was incremented after the call to point after the data just written.
Also \fBbuf\fR will no longer contain the pointer allocated by \fBOPENSSL_malloc()\fR
and the subsequent call to \fBOPENSSL_free()\fR may well crash.
.PP
The auto allocation feature (setting buf to NULL) only works on OpenSSL
0.9.7 and later. Attempts to use it on earlier versions will typically
cause a segmentation violation.
.PP
Another trap to avoid is misuse of the \fBxp\fR argument to \fBd2i_X509()\fR:
.PP
.Vb 1
\& X509 *x;
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& if (!d2i_X509(&x, &p, len))
\&        /* Some error */
.Ve
This will probably crash somewhere in \fBd2i_X509()\fR. The reason for this
is that the variable \fBx\fR is uninitialized and an attempt will be made to
interpret its (invalid) value as an \fBX509\fR structure, typically causing
a segmentation violation. If \fBx\fR is set to NULL first then this will not
happen.
.SH "BUGS"
In some versions of OpenSSL the \*(L"reuse\*(R" behaviour of \fId2i_X509()\fR when 
\fB*px\fR is valid is broken and some parts of the reused structure may
persist if they are not present in the new one. As a result the use
of this \*(L"reuse\*(R" behaviour is strongly discouraged.
.PP
\fIi2d_X509()\fR will not return an error in many versions of OpenSSL,
if mandatory fields are not initialized due to a programming error
then the encoded structure may contain invalid data or omit the
fields entirely and will not be parsed by \fId2i_X509()\fR. This may be
fixed in future so code should not assume that \fIi2d_X509()\fR will
always succeed.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
\fId2i_X509()\fR, \fId2i_X509_bio()\fR and \fId2i_X509_fp()\fR return a valid \fBX509\fR structure
or \fBNULL\fR if an error occurs. The error code that can be obtained by
ERR_get_error(3). 
.PP
\fIi2d_X509()\fR, \fIi2d_X509_bio()\fR and \fIi2d_X509_fp()\fR return a the number of bytes
successfully encoded or a negative value if an error occurs. The error code
can be obtained by ERR_get_error(3). 
.PP
\fIi2d_X509_bio()\fR and \fIi2d_X509_fp()\fR returns 1 for success and 0 if an error 
occurs The error code can be obtained by ERR_get_error(3). 
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ERR_get_error(3)
.SH "HISTORY"
d2i_X509, i2d_X509, d2i_X509_bio, d2i_X509_fp, i2d_X509_bio and i2d_X509_fp
are available in all versions of SSLeay and OpenSSL.

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "d2i_X509 3"
.IX Name "d2i_X509, i2d_X509, d2i_X509_bio, d2i_X509_fp, i2d_X509_bio,
i2d_X509_fp - X509 encode and decode functions"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "EXAMPLES"

.IX Header "WARNINGS"

.IX Header "BUGS"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

.IX Header "HISTORY"

