.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH hmac 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
HMAC, HMAC_Init, HMAC_Update, HMAC_Final, HMAC_cleanup \- HMAC message
authentication code
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/hmac.h>
.Ve
.Vb 3
\& unsigned char *HMAC(const EVP_MD *evp_md, const void *key,
\&               int key_len, const unsigned char *d, int n,
\&               unsigned char *md, unsigned int *md_len);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& void HMAC_CTX_init(HMAC_CTX *ctx);
.Ve
.Vb 6
\& void HMAC_Init(HMAC_CTX *ctx, const void *key, int key_len,
\&               const EVP_MD *md);
\& void HMAC_Init_ex(HMAC_CTX *ctx, const void *key, int key_len,
\&                   const EVP_MD *md);
\& void HMAC_Update(HMAC_CTX *ctx, const unsigned char *data, int len);
\& void HMAC_Final(HMAC_CTX *ctx, unsigned char *md, unsigned int *len);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& void HMAC_CTX_cleanup(HMAC_CTX *ctx);
\& void HMAC_cleanup(HMAC_CTX *ctx);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
HMAC is a MAC (message authentication code), i.e. a keyed hash
function used for message authentication, which is based on a hash
function.
.PP
\fIHMAC()\fR computes the message authentication code of the \fBn\fR bytes at
\fBd\fR using the hash function \fBevp_md\fR and the key \fBkey\fR which is
\fBkey_len\fR bytes long.
.PP
It places the result in \fBmd\fR (which must have space for the output of
the hash function, which is no more than \fBEVP_MAX_MD_SIZE\fR bytes).
If \fBmd\fR is NULL, the digest is placed in a static array.  The size of
the output is placed in \fBmd_len\fR, unless it is \fBNULL\fR.
.PP
\fBevp_md\fR can be \fIEVP_sha1()\fR, \fIEVP_ripemd160()\fR etc.
\fBkey\fR and \fBevp_md\fR may be \fBNULL\fR if a key and hash function have
been set in a previous call to \fIHMAC_Init()\fR for that \fBHMAC_CTX\fR.
.PP
\fIHMAC_CTX_init()\fR initialises a \fBHMAC_CTX\fR before first use. It must be
called.
.PP
\fIHMAC_CTX_cleanup()\fR erases the key and other data from the \fBHMAC_CTX\fR
and releases any associated resources. It must be called when an
\fBHMAC_CTX\fR is no longer required.
.PP
\fIHMAC_cleanup()\fR is an alias for \fIHMAC_CTX_cleanup()\fR included for back
compatibility with 0.9.6b, it is deprecated.
.PP
The following functions may be used if the message is not completely
stored in memory:
.PP
\fIHMAC_Init()\fR initializes a \fBHMAC_CTX\fR structure to use the hash
function \fBevp_md\fR and the key \fBkey\fR which is \fBkey_len\fR bytes
long. It is deprecated and only included for backward compatibility
with OpenSSL 0.9.6b.
.PP
\fIHMAC_Init_ex()\fR initializes or reuses a \fBHMAC_CTX\fR structure to use
the function \fBevp_md\fR and key \fBkey\fR. Either can be NULL, in which
case the existing one will be reused. \fIHMAC_CTX_init()\fR must have been
called before the first use of an \fBHMAC_CTX\fR in this
function. \fBN.B. HMAC_Init() had this undocumented behaviour in
previous versions of OpenSSL \- failure to switch to HMAC_Init_ex() in
programs that expect it will cause them to stop working\fR.
.PP
\fIHMAC_Update()\fR can be called repeatedly with chunks of the message to
be authenticated (\fBlen\fR bytes at \fBdata\fR).
.PP
\fIHMAC_Final()\fR places the message authentication code in \fBmd\fR, which
must have space for the hash function output.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
\fIHMAC()\fR returns a pointer to the message authentication code.
.PP
\fIHMAC_CTX_init()\fR, \fIHMAC_Init_ex()\fR, \fIHMAC_Update()\fR, \fIHMAC_Final()\fR and
\fIHMAC_CTX_cleanup()\fR do not return values.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
RFC 2104
.SH "SEE ALSO"
sha(3), evp(3)
.SH "HISTORY"
\fIHMAC()\fR, \fIHMAC_Init()\fR, \fIHMAC_Update()\fR, \fIHMAC_Final()\fR and \fIHMAC_cleanup()\fR
are available since SSLeay 0.9.0.
.PP
\fIHMAC_CTX_init()\fR, \fIHMAC_Init_ex()\fR and \fIHMAC_CTX_cleanup()\fR are available
since OpenSSL 0.9.7.

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "hmac 3"
.IX Name "HMAC, HMAC_Init, HMAC_Update, HMAC_Final, HMAC_cleanup - HMAC message
authentication code"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Header "CONFORMING TO"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

.IX Header "HISTORY"

