.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH RAND_egd 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
RAND_egd \- query entropy gathering daemon
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/rand.h>
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& int RAND_egd(const char *path);
\& int RAND_egd_bytes(const char *path, int bytes);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int RAND_query_egd_bytes(const char *path, unsigned char *buf, int bytes);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fIRAND_egd()\fR queries the entropy gathering daemon EGD on socket \fBpath\fR.
It queries 255 bytes and uses RAND_add(3) to seed the
OpenSSL built-in PRNG. \fIRAND_egd\fR\|(path) is a wrapper for
\fIRAND_egd_bytes\fR\|(path, 255);
.PP
\fIRAND_egd_bytes()\fR queries the entropy gathering daemon EGD on socket \fBpath\fR.
It queries \fBbytes\fR bytes and uses RAND_add(3) to seed the
OpenSSL built-in PRNG.
This function is more flexible than \fIRAND_egd()\fR.
When only one secret key must
be generated, it is not necessary to request the full amount 255 bytes from
the EGD socket. This can be advantageous, since the amount of entropy
that can be retrieved from EGD over time is limited.
.PP
\fIRAND_query_egd_bytes()\fR performs the actual query of the EGD daemon on socket
\fBpath\fR. If \fBbuf\fR is given, \fBbytes\fR bytes are queried and written into
\fBbuf\fR. If \fBbuf\fR is NULL, \fBbytes\fR bytes are queried and used to seed the
OpenSSL built-in PRNG using RAND_add(3).
.SH "NOTES"
On systems without /dev/*random devices providing entropy from the kernel,
the EGD entropy gathering daemon can be used to collect entropy. It provides
a socket interface through which entropy can be gathered in chunks up to
255 bytes. Several chunks can be queried during one connection.
.PP
EGD is available from http://www.lothar.com/tech/crypto/ (\f(CWperl
Makefile.PL; make; make install\fR to install). It is run as \fBegd\fR
\fIpath\fR, where \fIpath\fR is an absolute path designating a socket. When
\fIRAND_egd()\fR is called with that path as an argument, it tries to read
random bytes that EGD has collected. The read is performed in
non-blocking mode.
.PP
Alternatively, the EGD\-interface compatible daemon PRNGD can be used. It is
available from
http://www.aet.tu-cottbus.de/personen/jaenicke/postfix_tls/prngd.html .
PRNGD does employ an internal PRNG itself and can therefore never run
out of entropy.
.PP
OpenSSL automatically queries EGD when entropy is requested via \fIRAND_bytes()\fR
or the status is checked via \fIRAND_status()\fR for the first time, if the socket
is located at /var/run/egd-pool, /dev/egd-pool or /etc/egd-pool.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
\fIRAND_egd()\fR and \fIRAND_egd_bytes()\fR return the number of bytes read from the
daemon on success, and \-1 if the connection failed or the daemon did not
return enough data to fully seed the PRNG.
.PP
\fIRAND_query_egd_bytes()\fR returns the number of bytes read from the daemon on
success, and \-1 if the connection failed. The PRNG state is not considered.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rand(3), RAND_add(3),
RAND_cleanup(3)
.SH "HISTORY"
\fIRAND_egd()\fR is available since OpenSSL 0.9.5.
.PP
\fIRAND_egd_bytes()\fR is available since OpenSSL 0.9.6.
.PP
\fIRAND_query_egd_bytes()\fR is available since OpenSSL 0.9.7.
.PP
The automatic query of /var/run/egd-pool et al was added in OpenSSL 0.9.7.

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "RAND_egd 3"
.IX Name "RAND_egd - query entropy gathering daemon"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUE"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

.IX Header "HISTORY"

