.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH threads 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
CRYPTO_set_locking_callback, CRYPTO_set_id_callback, CRYPTO_num_locks,
CRYPTO_set_dynlock_create_callback, CRYPTO_set_dynlock_lock_callback,
CRYPTO_set_dynlock_destroy_callback, CRYPTO_get_new_dynlockid,
CRYPTO_destroy_dynlockid, CRYPTO_lock \- OpenSSL thread support
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/crypto.h>
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& void CRYPTO_set_locking_callback(void (*locking_function)(int mode,
\&        int n, const char *file, int line));
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& void CRYPTO_set_id_callback(unsigned long (*id_function)(void));
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int CRYPTO_num_locks(void);
.Ve
.Vb 2
\& /* struct CRYPTO_dynlock_value needs to be defined by the user */
\& struct CRYPTO_dynlock_value;
.Ve
.Vb 7
\& void CRYPTO_set_dynlock_create_callback(struct CRYPTO_dynlock_value *
\&        (*dyn_create_function)(char *file, int line));
\& void CRYPTO_set_dynlock_lock_callback(void (*dyn_lock_function)
\&        (int mode, struct CRYPTO_dynlock_value *l,
\&        const char *file, int line));
\& void CRYPTO_set_dynlock_destroy_callback(void (*dyn_destroy_function)
\&        (struct CRYPTO_dynlock_value *l, const char *file, int line));
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int CRYPTO_get_new_dynlockid(void);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& void CRYPTO_destroy_dynlockid(int i);
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& void CRYPTO_lock(int mode, int n, const char *file, int line);
.Ve
.Vb 10
\& #define CRYPTO_w_lock(type)    \e
\&        CRYPTO_lock(CRYPTO_LOCK|CRYPTO_WRITE,type,__FILE__,__LINE__)
\& #define CRYPTO_w_unlock(type)  \e
\&        CRYPTO_lock(CRYPTO_UNLOCK|CRYPTO_WRITE,type,__FILE__,__LINE__)
\& #define CRYPTO_r_lock(type)    \e
\&        CRYPTO_lock(CRYPTO_LOCK|CRYPTO_READ,type,__FILE__,__LINE__)
\& #define CRYPTO_r_unlock(type)  \e
\&        CRYPTO_lock(CRYPTO_UNLOCK|CRYPTO_READ,type,__FILE__,__LINE__)
\& #define CRYPTO_add(addr,amount,type)   \e
\&        CRYPTO_add_lock(addr,amount,type,__FILE__,__LINE__)
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
OpenSSL can safely be used in multi-threaded applications provided
that at least two callback functions are set.
.PP
\fIlocking_function\fR\|(int mode, int n, const char *file, int line) is
needed to perform locking on shared data structures. 
(Note that OpenSSL uses a number of global data structures that
will be implicitly shared whenever multiple threads use OpenSSL.)
Multi-threaded applications will crash at random if it is not set.
.PP
\fIlocking_function()\fR must be able to handle up to \fICRYPTO_num_locks()\fR
different mutex locks. It sets the \fBn\fR\-th lock if \fBmode\fR &
\fBCRYPTO_LOCK\fR, and releases it otherwise.
.PP
\fBfile\fR and \fBline\fR are the file number of the function setting the
lock. They can be useful for debugging.
.PP
\fIid_function\fR\|(void) is a function that returns a thread ID. It is not
needed on Windows nor on platforms where \fIgetpid()\fR returns a different
ID for each thread (most notably Linux).
.PP
Additionally, OpenSSL supports dynamic locks, and sometimes, some parts
of OpenSSL need it for better performance.  To enable this, the following
is required:
.Ip "\(bu Three additional callback function, dyn_create_function, dyn_lock_function and dyn_destroy_function." 4
.Ip "\(bu A structure defined with the data that each lock needs to handle." 4
.PP
struct CRYPTO_dynlock_value has to be defined to contain whatever structure
is needed to handle locks.
.PP
\fIdyn_create_function\fR\|(const char *file, int line) is needed to create a
lock.  Multi-threaded applications might crash at random if it is not set.
.PP
\fIdyn_lock_function\fR\|(int mode, CRYPTO_dynlock *l, const char *file, int line)
is needed to perform locking off dynamic lock numbered n. Multi-threaded
applications might crash at random if it is not set.
.PP
\fIdyn_destroy_function\fR\|(CRYPTO_dynlock *l, const char *file, int line) is
needed to destroy the lock l. Multi-threaded applications might crash at
random if it is not set.
.PP
\fICRYPTO_get_new_dynlockid()\fR is used to create locks.  It will call
dyn_create_function for the actual creation.
.PP
\fICRYPTO_destroy_dynlockid()\fR is used to destroy locks.  It will call
dyn_destroy_function for the actual destruction.
.PP
\fICRYPTO_lock()\fR is used to lock and unlock the locks.  mode is a bitfield
describing what should be done with the lock.  n is the number of the
lock as returned from \fICRYPTO_get_new_dynlockid()\fR.  mode can be combined
from the following values.  These values are pairwise exclusive, with
undefined behaviour if misused (for example, \s-1CRYPTO_READ\s0 and \s-1CRYPTO_WRITE\s0
should not be used together):
.PP
.Vb 4
\&        CRYPTO_LOCK     0x01
\&        CRYPTO_UNLOCK   0x02
\&        CRYPTO_READ     0x04
\&        CRYPTO_WRITE    0x08
.Ve
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
\fICRYPTO_num_locks()\fR returns the required number of locks.
.PP
\fICRYPTO_get_new_dynlockid()\fR returns the index to the newly created lock.
.PP
The other functions return no values.
.SH "NOTE"
You can find out if OpenSSL was configured with thread support:
.PP
.Vb 7
\& #define OPENSSL_THREAD_DEFINES
\& #include <openssl/opensslconf.h>
\& #if defined(THREADS)
\&   // thread support enabled
\& #else
\&   // no thread support
\& #endif
.Ve
Also, dynamic locks are currently not used internally by OpenSSL, but
may do so in the future.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
\fBcrypto/threads/mttest.c\fR shows examples of the callback functions on
Solaris, Irix and Win32.
.SH "HISTORY"
\fICRYPTO_set_locking_callback()\fR and \fICRYPTO_set_id_callback()\fR are
available in all versions of SSLeay and OpenSSL.
\fICRYPTO_num_locks()\fR was added in OpenSSL 0.9.4.
All functions dealing with dynamic locks were added in OpenSSL 0.9.5b-dev.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crypto(3)

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "threads 3"
.IX Name "CRYPTO_set_locking_callback, CRYPTO_set_id_callback, CRYPTO_num_locks,
CRYPTO_set_dynlock_create_callback, CRYPTO_set_dynlock_lock_callback,
CRYPTO_set_dynlock_destroy_callback, CRYPTO_get_new_dynlockid,
CRYPTO_destroy_dynlockid, CRYPTO_lock - OpenSSL thread support"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Item "\(bu Three additional callback function, dyn_create_function, dyn_lock_function and dyn_destroy_function."

.IX Item "\(bu A structure defined with the data that each lock needs to handle."

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Header "NOTE"

.IX Header "EXAMPLES"

.IX Header "HISTORY"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

