.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt, X509_NAME_add_entry_by_OBJ, X509_NAME_add_entry_by_NID,
X509_NAME_add_entry, X509_NAME_delete_entry \- X509_NAME modification functions
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
int \fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt\fR\|(X509_NAME *name, char *field, int type, unsigned char *bytes, int len, int loc, int set);
int \fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_OBJ\fR\|(X509_NAME *name, ASN1_OBJECT *obj, int type, unsigned char *bytes, int len, int loc, int set);
int \fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_NID\fR\|(X509_NAME *name, int nid, int type, unsigned char *bytes, int len, int loc, int set);
int \fIX509_NAME_add_entry\fR\|(X509_NAME *name,X509_NAME_ENTRY *ne, int loc, int set);
X509_NAME_ENTRY *\fIX509_NAME_delete_entry\fR\|(X509_NAME *name, int loc);
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt()\fR, \fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_OBJ()\fR and
\fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_NID()\fR add a field whose name is defined
by a string \fBfield\fR, an object \fBobj\fR or a NID \fBnid\fR respectively.
The field value to be added is in \fBbytes\fR of length \fBlen\fR. If
\fBlen\fR is \-1 then the field length is calculated internally using
\fIstrlen\fR\|(bytes).
.PP
The type of field is determined by \fBtype\fR which can either be a
definition of the type of \fBbytes\fR (such as \fBMBSTRING_ASC\fR) or a
standard ASN1 type (such as \fBV_ASN1_IA5STRING\fR). The new entry is
added to a position determined by \fBloc\fR and \fBset\fR.
.PP
\fIX509_NAME_add_entry()\fR adds a copy of \fBX509_NAME_ENTRY\fR structure \fBne\fR
to \fBname\fR. The new entry is added to a position determined by \fBloc\fR
and \fBset\fR. Since a copy of \fBne\fR is added \fBne\fR must be freed up after
the call.
.PP
\fIX509_NAME_delete_entry()\fR deletes an entry from \fBname\fR at position
\fBloc\fR. The deleted entry is returned and must be freed up.
.SH "NOTES"
The use of string types such as \fBMBSTRING_ASC\fR or \fBMBSTRING_UTF8\fR
is strongly recommened for the \fBtype\fR parameter. This allows the
internal code to correctly determine the type of the field and to
apply length checks according to the relevant standards. This is
done using \fIASN1_STRING_set_by_NID()\fR.
.PP
If instead an ASN1 type is used no checks are performed and the
supplied data in \fBbytes\fR is used directly.
.PP
In \fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt()\fR the \fBfield\fR string represents
the field name using \fIOBJ_txt2obj\fR\|(field, 0).
.PP
The \fBloc\fR and \fBset\fR parameters determine where a new entry should
be added. For almost all applications \fBloc\fR can be set to \-1 and \fBset\fR
to 0. This adds a new entry to the end of \fBname\fR as a single valued
RelativeDistinguishedName (RDN).
.PP
\fBloc\fR actually determines the index where the new entry is inserted:
if it is \-1 it is appended. 
.PP
\fBset\fR determines how the new type is added. If it is zero a
new RDN is created.
.PP
If \fBset\fR is \-1 or 1 it is added to the previous or next RDN
structure respectively. This will then be a multivalued RDN:
since multivalues RDNs are very seldom used \fBset\fR is almost
always set to zero.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
Create an \fBX509_NAME\fR structure:
.PP
\*(L"C=UK, O=Disorganized Organization, CN=Joe Bloggs\*(R"
.PP
.Vb 13
\& X509_NAME *nm;
\& nm = X509_NAME_new();
\& if (nm == NULL)
\&        /* Some error */
\& if (!X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt(nm, MBSTRING_ASC,
\&                        "C", "UK", -1, -1, 0))
\&        /* Error */
\& if (!X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt(nm, MBSTRING_ASC,
\&                        "O", "Disorganized Organization", -1, -1, 0))
\&        /* Error */
\& if (!X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt(nm, MBSTRING_ASC,
\&                        "CN", "Joe Bloggs", -1, -1, 0))
\&        /* Error */
.Ve
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
\fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt()\fR, \fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_OBJ()\fR,
\fIX509_NAME_add_entry_by_NID()\fR and \fIX509_NAME_add_entry()\fR return 1 for
success of 0 if an error occurred.
.PP
\fIX509_NAME_delete_entry()\fR returns either the deleted \fBX509_NAME_ENTRY\fR
structure of \fBNULL\fR if an error occurred.
.SH "BUGS"
\fBtype\fR can still be set to \fBV_ASN1_APP_CHOOSE\fR to use a
different algorithm to determine field types. Since this form does
not understand multicharacter types, performs no length checks and
can result in invalid field types its use is strongly discouraged.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ERR_get_error(3), d2i_X509_NAME(3)
.SH "HISTORY"

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt 3"
.IX Name "X509_NAME_add_entry_by_txt, X509_NAME_add_entry_by_OBJ, X509_NAME_add_entry_by_NID,
X509_NAME_add_entry, X509_NAME_delete_entry - X509_NAME modification functions"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "EXAMPLES"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Header "BUGS"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

.IX Header "HISTORY"

