.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH SSL_shutdown 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
SSL_shutdown \- shut down a TLS/SSL connection
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/ssl.h>
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int SSL_shutdown(SSL *ssl);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fISSL_shutdown()\fR shuts down an active TLS/SSL connection. It sends the 
\*(L"close notify\*(R" shutdown alert to the peer.
.SH "NOTES"
\fISSL_shutdown()\fR tries to send the \*(L"close notify\*(R" shutdown alert to the peer.
Whether the operation succeeds or not, the SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN flag is set and
a currently open session is considered closed and good and will be kept in the
session cache for further reuse.
.PP
The shutdown procedure consists of 2 steps: the sending of the \*(L"close notify\*(R"
shutdown alert and the reception of the peer's \*(L"close notify\*(R" shutdown
alert. According to the TLS standard, it is acceptable for an application
to only send its shutdown alert and then close the underlying connection
without waiting for the peer's response (this way resources can be saved,
as the process can already terminate or serve another connection).
When the underlying connection shall be used for more communications, the
complete shutdown procedure (bidirectional \*(L"close notify\*(R" alerts) must be
performed, so that the peers stay synchronized.
.PP
\fISSL_shutdown()\fR supports both uni- and bidirectional shutdown by its 2 step
behaviour.
.Ip "When the application is the first party to send the \*(N"close notify\*(T" alert, SSL_shutdown() will only send the alert and the set the \s-1SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN\s0 flag (so that the session is considered good and will be kept in cache). SSL_shutdown() will then return with 0. If a unidirectional shutdown is enough (the underlying connection shall be closed anyway), this first call to SSL_shutdown() is sufficient. In order to complete the bidirectional shutdown handshake, SSL_shutdown() must be called again. The second call will make SSL_shutdown() wait for the peer's \*(N"close notify\*(T" shutdown alert. On success, the second call to SSL_shutdown() will return with 1." 4
.Ip "If the peer already sent the \*(N"close notify\*(T" alert \fBand\fR it was already processed implicitly inside another function (SSL_read(3)), the \s-1SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN\s0 flag is set. SSL_shutdown() will send the \*(N"close notify\*(T" alert, set the \s-1SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN\s0 flag and will immediately return with 1. Whether \s-1SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN\s0 is already set can be checked using the SSL_get_shutdown() (see also SSL_set_shutdown(3) call." 4
.PP
It is therefore recommended, to check the return value of \fISSL_shutdown()\fR
and call \fISSL_shutdown()\fR again, if the bidirectional shutdown is not yet
complete (return value of the first call is 0). As the shutdown is not
specially handled in the SSLv2 protocol, \fISSL_shutdown()\fR will succeed on
the first call.
.PP
The behaviour of \fISSL_shutdown()\fR additionally depends on the underlying \s-1BIO\s0. 
.PP
If the underlying \s-1BIO\s0 is \fBblocking\fR, \fISSL_shutdown()\fR will only return once the
handshake step has been finished or an error occurred.
.PP
If the underlying \s-1BIO\s0 is \fBnon-blocking\fR, \fISSL_shutdown()\fR will also return
when the underlying \s-1BIO\s0 could not satisfy the needs of \fISSL_shutdown()\fR
to continue the handshake. In this case a call to \fISSL_get_error()\fR with the
return value of \fISSL_shutdown()\fR will yield \fB\s-1SSL_ERROR_WANT_READ\s0\fR or
\fB\s-1SSL_ERROR_WANT_WRITE\s0\fR. The calling process then must repeat the call after
taking appropriate action to satisfy the needs of \fISSL_shutdown()\fR.
The action depends on the underlying \s-1BIO\s0. When using a non-blocking socket,
nothing is to be done, but \fIselect()\fR can be used to check for the required
condition. When using a buffering \s-1BIO\s0, like a \s-1BIO\s0 pair, data must be written
into or retrieved out of the \s-1BIO\s0 before being able to continue.
.PP
\fISSL_shutdown()\fR can be modified to only set the connection to \*(L"shutdown\*(R"
state but not actually send the \*(L"close notify\*(R" alert messages,
see SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown(3).
When \*(L"quiet shutdown\*(R" is enabled, \fISSL_shutdown()\fR will always succeed
and return 1.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
The following return values can occur:
.Ip "1" 4
The shutdown was successfully completed. The \*(L"close notify\*(R" alert was sent
and the peer's \*(L"close notify\*(R" alert was received.
.Ip "0" 4
The shutdown is not yet finished. Call \fISSL_shutdown()\fR for a second time,
if a bidirectional shutdown shall be performed.
The output of SSL_get_error(3) may be misleading, as an
erroneous \s-1SSL_ERROR_SYSCALL\s0 may be flagged even though no error occurred.
.Ip "-1" 4
The shutdown was not successful because a fatal error occurred either
at the protocol level or a connection failure occurred. It can also occur if
action is need to continue the operation for non-blocking BIOs.
Call SSL_get_error(3) with the return value \fBret\fR
to find out the reason.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
SSL_get_error(3), SSL_connect(3),
SSL_accept(3), SSL_set_shutdown(3),
SSL_CTX_set_quiet_shutdown(3),
SSL_clear(3), SSL_free(3),
ssl(3), bio(3)

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "SSL_shutdown 3"
.IX Name "SSL_shutdown - shut down a TLS/SSL connection"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Item "When the application is the first party to send the \*(N"close notify\*(T" alert, SSL_shutdown() will only send the alert and the set the \s-1SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN\s0 flag (so that the session is considered good and will be kept in cache). SSL_shutdown() will then return with 0. If a unidirectional shutdown is enough (the underlying connection shall be closed anyway), this first call to SSL_shutdown() is sufficient. In order to complete the bidirectional shutdown handshake, SSL_shutdown() must be called again. The second call will make SSL_shutdown() wait for the peer's \*(N"close notify\*(T" shutdown alert. On success, the second call to SSL_shutdown() will return with 1."

.IX Item "If the peer already sent the \*(N"close notify\*(T" alert \fBand\fR it was already processed implicitly inside another function (SSL_read(3)), the \s-1SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN\s0 flag is set. SSL_shutdown() will send the \*(N"close notify\*(T" alert, set the \s-1SSL_SENT_SHUTDOWN\s0 flag and will immediately return with 1. Whether \s-1SSL_RECEIVED_SHUTDOWN\s0 is already set can be checked using the SSL_get_shutdown() (see also SSL_set_shutdown(3) call."

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Item "1"

.IX Item "0"

.IX Item "-1"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

