.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH SSL_write 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
SSL_write \- write bytes to a TLS/SSL connection.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/ssl.h>
.Ve
.Vb 1
\& int SSL_write(SSL *ssl, const void *buf, int num);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fISSL_write()\fR writes \fBnum\fR bytes from the buffer \fBbuf\fR into the specified
\fBssl\fR connection.
.SH "NOTES"
If necessary, \fISSL_write()\fR will negotiate a TLS/SSL session, if
not already explicitly performed by SSL_connect(3) or
SSL_accept(3). If the
peer requests a re-negotiation, it will be performed transparently during
the \fISSL_write()\fR operation. The behaviour of \fISSL_write()\fR depends on the
underlying BIO. 
.PP
For the transparent negotiation to succeed, the \fBssl\fR must have been
initialized to client or server mode. This is being done by calling
SSL_set_connect_state(3) or \fISSL_set_accept_state()\fR
before the first call to an SSL_read(3) or \fISSL_write()\fR function.
.PP
If the underlying BIO is \fBblocking\fR, \fISSL_write()\fR will only return, once the
write operation has been finished or an error occurred, except when a
renegotiation take place, in which case a SSL_ERROR_WANT_READ may occur. 
This behaviour can be controlled with the SSL_MODE_AUTO_RETRY flag of the
SSL_CTX_set_mode(3) call.
.PP
If the underlying BIO is \fBnon-blocking\fR, \fISSL_write()\fR will also return,
when the underlying BIO could not satisfy the needs of \fISSL_write()\fR
to continue the operation. In this case a call to
SSL_get_error(3) with the
return value of \fISSL_write()\fR will yield \fBSSL_ERROR_WANT_READ\fR or
\fBSSL_ERROR_WANT_WRITE\fR. As at any time a re-negotiation is possible, a
call to \fISSL_write()\fR can also cause read operations! The calling process
then must repeat the call after taking appropriate action to satisfy the
needs of \fISSL_write()\fR. The action depends on the underlying BIO. When using a
non-blocking socket, nothing is to be done, but \fIselect()\fR can be used to check
for the required condition. When using a buffering BIO, like a BIO pair, data
must be written into or retrieved out of the BIO before being able to continue.
.PP
\fISSL_write()\fR will only return with success, when the complete contents
of \fBbuf\fR of length \fBnum\fR has been written. This default behaviour
can be changed with the SSL_MODE_ENABLE_PARTIAL_WRITE option of
SSL_CTX_set_mode(3). When this flag is set,
\fISSL_write()\fR will also return with success, when a partial write has been
successfully completed. In this case the \fISSL_write()\fR operation is considered
completed. The bytes are sent and a new \fISSL_write()\fR operation with a new
buffer (with the already sent bytes removed) must be started.
A partial write is performed with the size of a message block, which is
16kB for SSLv3/TLSv1.
.SH "WARNING"
When an \fISSL_write()\fR operation has to be repeated because of
\fBSSL_ERROR_WANT_READ\fR or \fBSSL_ERROR_WANT_WRITE\fR, it must be repeated
with the same arguments.
.PP
When calling \fISSL_write()\fR with num=0 bytes to be sent the behaviour is
undefined.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
The following return values can occur:
.Ip ">0" 4
The write operation was successful, the return value is the number of
bytes actually written to the \s-1TLS/SSL\s0 connection.
.Ip "0" 4
The write operation was not successful. Probably the underlying connection
was closed. Call \fISSL_get_error()\fR with the return value \fBret\fR to find out,
whether an error occurred or the connection was shut down cleanly
(\s-1SSL_ERROR_ZERO_RETURN\s0).
.Sp
SSLv2 (deprecated) does not support a shutdown alert protocol, so it can
only be detected, whether the underlying connection was closed. It cannot
be checked, why the closure happened.
.Ip "<0" 4
The write operation was not successful, because either an error occurred
or action must be taken by the calling process. Call \fISSL_get_error()\fR with the
return value \fBret\fR to find out the reason.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
SSL_get_error(3), SSL_read(3),
SSL_CTX_set_mode(3), SSL_CTX_new(3),
SSL_connect(3), SSL_accept(3)
SSL_set_connect_state(3),
ssl(3), bio(3)

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "SSL_write 3"
.IX Name "SSL_write - write bytes to a TLS/SSL connection."

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "WARNING"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Item ">0"

.IX Item "0"

.IX Item "<0"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

