.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH SSL_CIPHER_get_name 3 "0.9.7d" "2/Sep/2004" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
SSL_CIPHER_get_name, SSL_CIPHER_get_bits, SSL_CIPHER_get_version, SSL_CIPHER_description \- get SSL_CIPHER properties
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.Vb 1
\& #include <openssl/ssl.h>
.Ve
.Vb 4
\& const char *SSL_CIPHER_get_name(SSL_CIPHER *cipher);
\& int SSL_CIPHER_get_bits(SSL_CIPHER *cipher, int *alg_bits);
\& char *SSL_CIPHER_get_version(SSL_CIPHER *cipher);
\& char *SSL_CIPHER_description(SSL_CIPHER *cipher, char *buf, int size);
.Ve
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fISSL_CIPHER_get_name()\fR returns a pointer to the name of \fBcipher\fR. If the
argument is the NULL pointer, a pointer to the constant value \*(L"NONE\*(R" is
returned.
.PP
\fISSL_CIPHER_get_bits()\fR returns the number of secret bits used for \fBcipher\fR. If
\fBalg_bits\fR is not NULL, it contains the number of bits processed by the
chosen algorithm. If \fBcipher\fR is NULL, 0 is returned.
.PP
\fISSL_CIPHER_get_version()\fR returns the protocol version for \fBcipher\fR, currently
\*(L"SSLv2\*(R", \*(L"SSLv3\*(R", or \*(L"TLSv1\*(R". If \fBcipher\fR is NULL, \*(L"(NONE)\*(R" is returned.
.PP
\fISSL_CIPHER_description()\fR returns a textual description of the cipher used
into the buffer \fBbuf\fR of length \fBlen\fR provided. \fBlen\fR must be at least
128 bytes, otherwise a pointer to the the string \*(L"Buffer too small\*(R" is
returned. If \fBbuf\fR is NULL, a buffer of 128 bytes is allocated using
\fIOPENSSL_malloc()\fR. If the allocation fails, a pointer to the string
\*(L"OPENSSL_malloc Error\*(R" is returned.
.SH "NOTES"
The number of bits processed can be different from the secret bits. An
export cipher like e.g. EXP\-RC4-MD5 has only 40 secret bits. The algorithm
does use the full 128 bits (which would be returned for \fBalg_bits\fR), of
which however 88bits are fixed. The search space is hence only 40 bits.
.PP
The string returned by \fISSL_CIPHER_description()\fR in case of success consists
of cleartext information separated by one or more blanks in the following
sequence:
.Ip "<ciphername>" 4
Textual representation of the cipher name.
.Ip "<protocol version>" 4
Protocol version: \fBSSLv2\fR, \fBSSLv3\fR. The TLSv1 ciphers are flagged with SSLv3.
.Ip "Kx=<key exchange>" 4
Key exchange method: \fB\s-1RSA\s0\fR (for export ciphers as \fB\s-1RSA\s0(512)\fR or
\fB\s-1RSA\s0(1024)\fR), \fB\s-1DH\s0\fR (for export ciphers as \fB\s-1DH\s0(512)\fR or \fB\s-1DH\s0(1024)\fR),
\fB\s-1DH/RSA\s0\fR, \fB\s-1DH/DSS\s0\fR, \fBFortezza\fR.
.Ip "Au=<authentication>" 4
Authentication method: \fB\s-1RSA\s0\fR, \fB\s-1DSS\s0\fR, \fB\s-1DH\s0\fR, \fBNone\fR. None is the
representation of anonymous ciphers.
.Ip "Enc=<symmetric encryption method>" 4
Encryption method with number of secret bits: \fB\s-1DES\s0(40)\fR, \fB\s-1DES\s0(56)\fR,
\fB3DES(168)\fR, \fB\s-1RC4\s0(40)\fR, \fB\s-1RC4\s0(56)\fR, \fB\s-1RC4\s0(64)\fR, \fB\s-1RC4\s0(128)\fR,
\fB\s-1RC2\s0(40)\fR, \fB\s-1RC2\s0(56)\fR, \fB\s-1RC2\s0(128)\fR, \fB\s-1IDEA\s0(128)\fR, \fBFortezza\fR, \fBNone\fR.
.Ip "Mac=<message authentication code>" 4
Message digest: \fB\s-1MD5\s0\fR, \fB\s-1SHA1\s0\fR.
.Ip "<export flag>" 4
If the cipher is flagged exportable with respect to old \s-1US\s0 crypto
regulations, the word \*(L"\fBexport\fR\*(R" is printed.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
Some examples for the output of \fISSL_CIPHER_description()\fR:
.PP
.Vb 4
\& EDH-RSA-DES-CBC3-SHA    SSLv3 Kx=DH       Au=RSA  Enc=3DES(168) Mac=SHA1
\& EDH-DSS-DES-CBC3-SHA    SSLv3 Kx=DH       Au=DSS  Enc=3DES(168) Mac=SHA1
\& RC4-MD5                 SSLv3 Kx=RSA      Au=RSA  Enc=RC4(128)  Mac=MD5
\& EXP-RC4-MD5             SSLv3 Kx=RSA(512) Au=RSA  Enc=RC4(40)   Mac=MD5  export
.Ve
.SH "BUGS"
If \fISSL_CIPHER_description()\fR is called with \fBcipher\fR being NULL, the
library crashes.
.PP
If \fISSL_CIPHER_description()\fR cannot handle a built-in cipher, the according
description of the cipher property is \fBunknown\fR. This case should not
occur.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
See DESCRIPTION
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ssl(3), SSL_get_current_cipher(3),
SSL_get_ciphers(3), ciphers(1)

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "SSL_CIPHER_get_name 3"
.IX Name "SSL_CIPHER_get_name, SSL_CIPHER_get_bits, SSL_CIPHER_get_version, SSL_CIPHER_description - get SSL_CIPHER properties"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Item "<ciphername>"

.IX Item "<protocol version>"

.IX Item "Kx=<key exchange>"

.IX Item "Au=<authentication>"

.IX Item "Enc=<symmetric encryption method>"

.IX Item "Mac=<message authentication code>"

.IX Item "<export flag>"

.IX Header "EXAMPLES"

.IX Header "BUGS"

.IX Header "RETURN VALUES"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

