.ig
Copyright (C) 1989, 1990, 2000, 2001, 2006, 2009
  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.
.\"
.\" Skrivet av J\[:o]rgen H\[:a]gg, Lund, Sverige
.\"
.
.mso sv.tmac
.
.TH GROFF_MMSE @MAN7EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.
.
.SH NAMN
.
groff_mmse \- svenska mm makro f\[:o]r groff
.
.
.SH SYNTAX
.
.B groff
.B \-m@TMAC_M_PREFIX@mse
[
.IR flaggor .\|.\|.\&
]
[
.IR filer .\|.\|.\&
]
.
.
.SH BESKRIVNING
.
.B m@TMAC_M_PREFIX@mse
\[:a]r en svensk variant av
.BR m@TMAC_M_PREFIX@m .
Alla texter \[:a]r \[:o]versatta.
En A4 sida f\[oa]r text som \[:a]r 13\~cm bred,
3.5\~cm indragning samt \[:a]r 28.5\~cm h\[:o]g.
Det finns st\[:o]d f\[:o]r brevuppst\[:a]llning enligt svensk standard
f\[:o]r v\[:a]nster och h\[:o]gerjusterad text.
.
.LP
.B COVER
kan anv\[:a]nda
.I se_ms
som argument.
Detta ger ett svenskt f\[:o]rs\[:a]ttsblad.
Se
.BR groff_mm (@MAN7EXT@)
f\[:o]r \[:o]vriga detaljer.
.
.
.SH BREV
.
Tillg\[:a]ngliga brevtyper:
.
.TP
.B ".LT SVV"
V\[:a]nsterst\[:a]lld l\[:o]ptext med adressat i position T0 (v\[:a]nsterst\[:a]llt).
.
.TP
.B ".LT SVH"
H\[:o]gerst\[:a]lld l\[:o]ptext med adressat i position T4 (passar
f\[:o]nsterkuvert).
.
.LP
F\[:o]ljande extra LO-variabler anv\[:a]nds.
.
.TP
.BI ".LO DNAMN\ " namn
Anger dokumentets namn.
.
.TP
.BI ".LO MDAT\ " datum
Mottagarens datum, anges under
.B Ert datum:
.RB ( LetMDAT ).
.
.TP
.BI ".LO BIL\ " str\[:a]ng
Anger bilaga, nummer eller str\[:a]ng med
.B Bilaga
.RB ( LetBIL )
som prefix.
.
.TP
.BI ".LO KOMP\ " text
Anger kompletteringsuppgift.
.
.TP
.BI ".LO DBET\ " beteckning
Anger dokumentbeteckning eller dokumentnummer.
.
.TP
.BI ".LO BET\ " beteckning
Anger beteckning (\[:a]rendebeteckning i form av diarienummer eller liknande).
.
.TP
.BI ".LO SIDOR\ " antal
Anger totala antalet sidor och skrivs ut efter sidnumret inom
parenteser.
.
.LP
Om makrot
.B .TP
\[:a]r definierat anropas det efter utskrift av brevhuvudet.
D\[:a]r l\[:a]gger man l\[:a]mpligen in postadress och annat som brevfot.
.
.
.SH "SKRIVET AV"
.
J\[:o]rgen H\[:a]gg, Lund, Sweden <Jorgen.Hagg@axis.se>
.
.
.SH FILER
.
.TP
.B @MACRODIR@/@TMAC_M_PREFIX@mse.tmac
.TP
.B @TMAC_MDIR@/se_*.cov
.
.
.SH "SE OCKS\[oA]"
.
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
.br
.BR groff_mm (@MAN7EXT@)
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" coding: latin-1
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
