.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Daniel Gerzo <danger@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd May 13, 2007
.Dt BOOT.CONFIG 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm boot.config
.Nd "Configuration file for the boot blocks"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains options for the
.Fx
boot block code.
.Pp
When the
.Fx
boot loader runs, it searches the
.Dq Li a
slice of the boot partition for a
.Nm
file (as a result, slices which are missing an
.Dq Li a
partition require user intervention during the boot process).
If the
.Nm
file is found, its contents are used as the default configuration
options for the boot block code and are echoed to the system console.
.Pp
A valid format of this file is to put BIOS drive number, a controller
type, a unit number, a partition, a kernel file name, and any other
valid
.Xr boot 8
option on a single line, as it is done at the
.Dq Li "boot:"
prompt.
.Pp
The options related to the boot image selection described below and all
the other options available for
.Nm
are documented in detail in the
.Xr boot 8
manual page.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /boot.config -compact
.It Pa /boot.config
parameters for the boot blocks (optional)
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "-P" > /boot.config
.Ed
.Pp
will Probe the keyboard, if not found it will 
automatically activate the serial console during
boot stage 2.
.Pp
The command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "1:ad(1,a)/boot/loader" > /boot.config
.Ed
.Pp
will instruct the second stage of
.Xr boot 8
on the first disk to boot with the third
.Xr boot 8
stage from the second disk.
.Pp
The command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# echo "1:ad(1,a)/boot/kernel/kernel -S57600" > /boot.config
.Ed
.Pp
will immediatly boot the kernel and skip the loader stage
and switch to console to serial at a speed of 57600.
.Pp
Other Flags:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It -a
AskName: Instructs the kernel to prompt the user for the name of the root device
when the kernel is booted.
.It -s
Single: Boot into Single User Mode.
.It -r
DefaultRoot: Instructs the kernel to mount the statically compiled-in root file 
system.
.It -d
KernelDebugger: Instructs the kernel to start in the DDB debugger, rather than
proceeding to initialize when booted.
.It -c
Config
.It -v
Verbose: Be extra verbose during bootloader and kernel boot stage.
.It -h
Force Serial: If combined with Dual/Multiple mode, the resulting `console`
variable in loader will be set to "comconsole vidconsole"
.It -C
CDROM: Instructs the kernel to try to mount the root file system from CD-ROM.
.It -g
GDB: Selects gdb-remote mode for the kernel debugger by default.
.It -m
Mute: Do not generate any output during kernel boot stage.
.It -p
Pause: Pause Kernel at every output line.
.It -q
Quiet: Do not generate output during the bootloader stages.
.It -n
No-Interrupt
.It -D
DualMode: Same as Multiple Mode
.It -M
MultipleMode: Enables multiple console support in the kernel early on boot. Same
as DualMode. If Combined with -h flag, the serial connection will be
preferred and entered first in the `console` variable.
.El
.Pp
Commands:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It -S<XXXXX>
Speed: Set the serial port speed (one of: 110, 150, 300, 600, 1200, 2400,
4800, 9600, 19200, 38400, 57600, 115200). Defaults to 115200. Example:
-S38400 will activate the serial port and set the speed to 38400 Baud.
.It -P
Probe: Probe (AT Style) Keyboard. If found will activate standard vga
console, else the serial console will be made active.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr boot 8 ,
.Xr loader 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Daniel Gerzo Aq Mt danger@FreeBSD.org .
