.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 21, 2014
.Dt COMPILERS.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm compilers.conf
.Nd configuration file for external compilers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Pa /etc/compilers.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file allows to configure
.Dq external
compilers for usage with the
.Dx
.Xr build 7
system.
.Pp
The
.Pa /etc/defaults/compilers.conf
file specifies the default settings for all variables, the
.Pa /etc/compilers.conf
file specifies override settings.
.Pp
The following variable definitions are mandatory:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va <version>_INCOPTCXX"
.It Va <version>_CC
The pathname of the
.Nm cc
compiler.
.It Va <version>_CXX
The pathname of the
.Nm c++
and
.Nm CC
compilers.
.It Va <version>_CPP
The pathname of the
.Nm cpp
pre-processor.
.It Va <version>_INCOPT
The include flags passed to the invocation of every version of c compiler,
c++ compiler, and pre-processor program.  This is normally set to the 
predefined STD_INCOPT variable.
.It Va <version>_INCOPTCXX
The include flags passed to the invocation of every version of c++
compiler.  This is normally set to either the DPORT_GCC_STD_INCOPTXX or
DPORT_CLANG_STD_INCOPTXX predefined variables.
.El
.Pp
These variables are optionally available:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va <version>_INCOPTCXX"
.It Va <version>_GCC
The pathname of the
.Nm gcc
compiler.
.It Va <version>_GXX
The pathname of the
.Nm g++
compiler.
.It Va <version>_GCOV
The pathname of the
.Nm gcov
coverage testing tool.
.\"
.\" Uncomment the following after clang is brought into base
.\".It Va <version>_CLANG
.\"The pathname of the
.\".Nm clang
.\"compiler.
.\".It Va <version>_CLANGCXX
.\"The pathname of the
.\".Nm clang++
.\"compiler.
.\".It Va <version>_CLANGCPP
.\"The pathname of the
.\".Nm clang-cpp
.\"pre-processor.
.\"
.It Va <version>_CFLAGS
Additional flags to pass to the c compilers.
.It Va <version>_CXXFLAGS
Additional flags to pass to the c++ compilers.
.It Va <version>_CPPFLAGS
Additional flags to pass to the pre-processors.
.El
.Pp
Currently, defaults are provided for the
.Xr dports 7
compilers of
.Nm clang35
.Pa ( lang/clang35 ) ,
.Nm gcc48
.Pa ( lang/gcc48 ) ,
.Nm gcc49
.Pa ( lang/gcc49 ) ,
and
.Nm gcc5
.Pa ( lang/gcc5 ) .
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
In
.Dx ,
compilers are selected by setting the
.Ev CCVER
variable.
The
.Pa cpp ,
.Pa cc ,
etc\&. programs in
.Pa /usr/bin
are actually links to the
.Xr objformat 1
deflector program which is responsible for executing the
correct programs (located in
.Pa /usr/libexec/$CCVER ) .
.Pp
Traditionally,
.Dx
has 2 compilers in base, one of which is the default compiler and the other
is either a newer or older version.
In order to allow additional non-base compilers into
.Dx Ap s
build process,
.Xr objformat 1
deflects to
.Pa /usr/libexec/custom
when
.Ev CCVER Ap s
setting is not one of the compilers in base.
This directory contains a
.Pa cc
wrapper script (and some links to it).
The wrapper script then takes care of making the compiler look and behave
like a compiler in base.
.Pp
The settings in
.Nm
specify paths and flags for the
.Pa /usr/libexec/custom/cc
script.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/compilers.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/compilers.conf
external compiler configuration file
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Once configured the compiler can be used like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
env CCVER=<version> make
.Ed
.Pp
To try building world and kernel, use:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd /usr/src
env WORLD_CCVER=<version> make buildworld
env WORLD_CCVER=<version> make buildkernel KERNCONF=MYCONF
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr objformat 1 ,
.Xr build 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file first appeared in
.Dx 2.3 .
