.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 22, 2010
.Dt CRYPTTAB 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm crypttab
.Nd encrypted disk device table
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains a list of the encrypted disk devices of the system. Each
encrypted volume is described on a separate line; fields on each line are
separated by tabs or spaces.
.Pp
The first field,
.Pq Fa name ,
contains the name of the resultant crypto volume device, which will
be a node in
.Pa /dev/mapper
with the given
.Pa name .
.Pp
The second field,
.Pq Fa device ,
is the underlying device on which the crypto volume resides and must be
a full device path to a node in
.Pa /dev .
.Pp
The third field,
.Pq Fa keyfile ,
is either the value
.Pa none
or the full path on the file system to a keyfile to unlock the crypto
volume.
If
.Pa none
is specified, the system will prompt for a password during the boot
sequence.
.Pp
The fourth field,
.Pq Fa options ,
can contain a comma separated list with the following options on
.Dx
or can be set to
.Pa none .
.Bl -tag -width keyscript=/script.sh
.It Va tries=N
Prompt for the passphrase at most
.Fa N
times if the entered passphrase is incorrect.
.It Va timeout=T
Time out the interactive passphrase prompt after
.Fa T
seconds.
.It Va keyscript=script
Run the script pointed at by
.Fa script
to get the passphrase. The stdout output of the script will be used as the
passphrase instead of showing an interactive prompt.
.El
.Pp
Note that the
.Nm
file on
.Dx
currently only supports LUKS volumes and not raw
.Xr cryptsetup 8
volumes.
.Pp
If the
.Xr dm_target_crypt 4
target is not built-in, make sure to set up
.Xr loader.conf 5
to preload it, since
.Xr dm 4
is not able to autoload the targets before
.Pa /boot
is mounted.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/crypttab" -compact
.It Pa /etc/crypttab
The
.Nm
file resides in
.Pa /etc .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following line specifies a crypto volume without a keyfile, so
that a password will be prompted during the boot sequence. Upon
successful entry of the password the device
.Pa /dev/mapper/vol1
will be created.
.Pp
.Dl "vol1        /dev/da0s1b    none               none"
.Pp
The next example is as the one before but using a keyfile on
.Pa /boot
instead of an interactive password prompt.
.Pp
.Dl "vol1        /dev/da0s1b    /boot/keyfile.0    none"
.Pp
The last example shows the use of the options. It will ask at most 2 times
for a passphrase and time out after 10 seconds.
.Pp
.Dl "vol1        /dev/da0s1b    none               tries=2,timeout=10"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cryptsetup 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file format appeared in
.Dx 2.9 .
