.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd September 13, 2009
.Dt DEVTAB 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm devtab
.Nd label conversion file for device paths
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains label conversions for
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr mount 8 ,
.Xr hammer 8 ,
and other commands which expect device paths.
It is typically used to translate longer serial numbers (which
.Xr devfs 5
automatically creates as
.Pa /dev/serno/<serial>[.suffix] )
into short form names.
.Pp
.Nm
is only read by programs, and not written;
it is the duty of the system administrator to properly create
and maintain this file.
Each conversion is described on a separate line;
fields on each line are separated by tabs or spaces.
.Pp
The first field specifies the conversion's label.
.Pp
The second field is the conversion's type.
Valid types are
.Bl -tag -width ".Sy serno" -offset indent
.It Sy serno
Translates to
.Pa /dev/serno
.It Sy path
Translates to the path as specified
.El
.Pp
The third field specifies the conversion's base path
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/devtab" -compact
.It Pa /etc/devtab
The
.Nm
file resides in
.Pa /etc .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
This will translate references like
.Sy fubar ,
.Sy fubar.s1a
etc.\& to their
.Pa /dev/serno/L123456
counterparts:
.Pp
.Dl "fubar        serno        L123456"
.Pp
This will translate references like
.Sy fubar ,
.Sy fubar.s1a
etc.\& to their
.Pa /full/path
counterparts:
.Pp
.Dl "fubar        path         /full/path"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getdevpath 3 ,
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr hammer 8 ,
.Xr mount 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file format appeared in
.Dx 2.3 .
