.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Antonio Huete Jimenez <tuxillo@quantumachine.net>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS DOCUMENTATION IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd September 5, 2013
.Dt DIRFS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dirfs
.Nd "pseudo-filesystem for vkernel"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the vkernel,
place the following line in your
vkernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options DIRFS"
.Ed
.Pp
Actually this driver does not provide a loadable module.
.Pp
In
.Xr fstab 5 :
.Bd -literal -compact
/usr/src     /mnt dirfs rw 0 0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
was born from the idea of providing an easy way for
.Xr vkernel 7
to access host's directories without any sort of configuration as it would be
needed by NFS for example.
.Pp
It runs directly in the vkernel's
.Xr VFS 9
code, as any other regular filesystem but it uses syscalls to retrieve the
information needed for every operation requested.
.Pp
It should be noted that when the vkernel is run by a regular user, the
operations
.Nm
can perform on the mounted host directory are bound to the permissions of
the aforementioned user.
.Pp
Multiple
.Nm
mounts are allowed.
.Sh EXAMPLES
To mount a
.Nm
memory file system:
.Pp
.Dl "mount -t dirfs /usr/src /mnt"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr mount_dirfs 8 ,
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 3.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
vkernel implementation was written from the scratch by
.An Antonio Huete Jimenez Aq Mt tuxillo@quantumachine.net
.Pp
Numerous fixes and pointers by
.An Matthew Dillon Aq Mt dillon@apollo.backplane.com
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Antonio Huete Jimenez Aq Mt tuxillo@quantumachine.net
.Sh BUGS
Currently there is no locking on file descriptors between the host
and the vkernel.
This means that there might be problems with concurrent accesses to the same
file.
.Pp
There is no support for hardlinks in
.Nm
yet.
