.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Craig Rodrigues
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS DOCUMENTATION IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 7, 2021
.Dt EXT2FS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ext2fs
.Nd "ext2/ext3 file system"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To link into the kernel:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options EXT2FS"
.Ed
.Pp
To load as a kernel loadable module:
.Pp
.Dl "kldload ext2fs"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver will permit the
.Dx
kernel to access
ext2 and ext3
file systems.
Journalling is currently not supported.
.Sh EXAMPLES
To mount a
.Nm
volume located on
.Pa /dev/da1s1 :
.Pp
.Dl "mount_ext2fs /dev/da1s1 /mnt"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mount 2 ,
.Xr unmount 2 ,
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr mount 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
It was ported to
.Dx 5.9
by
.An Tomohiro Kusumi Aq Mt tkusumi@netbsd.org .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
kernel implementation is derived from code written,
or modified,
by
.An Godmar Back
using the UFS CSRG sources for CMU Mach.
.Pp
.An John Dyson
did the initial port to
.Fx .
.An Aditya Sarawgi
merged important parts of the allocation code from a clean-room
.Nx
implementation.
.\".An Zheng Liu
.\"and
.\".An Fedor Upurov
.\"implemented the read and write support respectively for
.\".Em ext4
.\"filesystems.
The
.Fx
community has contributed a huge amount of modifications.
.Pp
The initial version of this manual page was written by
.An Craig Rodrigues Aq Mt rodrigc@FreeBSD.org .
