.\" Copyright (c) 2000
.\"	Mike W. Meyer
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man5/make.conf.5,v 1.12.2.30 2003/05/18 17:05:55 brueffer Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 31, 2015
.Dt MAKE.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm make.conf
.Nd system build information
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Nm
contains settings that control the compilation of the
.Dx
sources.
The file
.Nm
is generally created by the system administrator when the values need
to be changed from their defaults.
.Pp
The purpose of
.Nm
is not to run commands or perform compilation actions
directly.
Instead, it is included by the various makefiles in
.Pa /usr/src
which conditionalize their internal actions according to the settings
found there.
.Pp
The
.Pa /etc/make.conf
file is included from the appropriate
.Pa Makefile
which specifies the default settings for all the available options.
Options need only be specified in
.Pa /etc/make.conf
when the system administrator wishes to override these defaults.
.Pp
The build procedures occur in three areas: world, kernel, and
documentation.
Variables set in
.Nm
may be applicable during builds in one, two, or all of these areas.
They may be specified for a particular build via the
.Fl D
option of
.Xr make 1 .
.Pp
The following lists provide a name and short description for each
variable you can use during the indicated builds.
The values of variables flagged as
.Vt bool
are ignored; the variable being set at all (even to
.Dq Li FALSE
or
.Dq Li NO )
causes it to be treated as if it were set.
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are used for all builds, or are used by the
.Pa makefiles
for things other than builds.
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va CPUTYPE
.Pq Vt str
Controls which processor should be targeted for generated code.
This controls processor-specific optimizations in certain code
(currently only OpenSSL) as well as modifying the value of
.Va CFLAGS
and
.Va COPTFLAGS
to contain the appropriate optimization directive to
.Xr gcc 1 .
The automatic setting of
.Va CFLAGS
and
.Va COPTFLAGS
may be overridden using the
.Va NO_CPU_CFLAGS
and
.Va NO_CPU_COPTFLAGS
variables, respectively.  Refer to
.Pa /usr/share/examples/etc/defaults/make.conf
for a list of recognized
.Va CPUTYPE
options.
.It Va CCVER
.Pq Vt str
Controls which GCC version to use by default.
It should be set as
.Li CCVER?=
so as not to interfere with overrides from userland.
We currently recommend that an override NOT be set in
.Pa /etc/make.conf .
Currently accepted values for compilers which are part of
.Dx
are
.Dq gcc50
and
.Dq gcc47
(default).
All other values will handled according to the settings in
.Xr compilers.conf 5 .
.It Va WORLD_CCVER
.Pq Vt str
Controls which version of GCC builds the base system, including
the kernel.
.Dq gcc47
is the default value.
.It Va LDVER
.Pq Vt str
Controls which linker to use by default.  Currently accepted
values are
.Dq ld.gold
(GNU Gold linker) and
.Dq ld.bfd
(default).
.It Va WORLD_LDVER
.Pq Vt str
Controls which linker builds the base system, including
the kernel.
.Dq ld.bfd
is the default value.
.It Va BINUTILSVER
.Pq Vt str
Controls which binutils to use by default.
Currently accepted values are
.Dq binutils224
and
.Dq binutils225
(default).
.It Va WORLD_BINUTILSVER
.Pq Vt str
Controls which version of binutils builds the base system, including
the kernel.
.Dq binutils225
is the default value.
.It Va CFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Controls the compiler setting when compiling C code.
Optimization levels above
.Fl O
.Pq Fl O2 , No ...
are not supported.
.Va BDECFLAGS
is provided as a set of
.Xr gcc 1
settings suggested by
.An Bruce Evans Aq Mt bde@FreeBSD.org
for developing and testing changes.
They can be used, if set, by:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
CFLAGS+=${BDECFLAGS}
.Ed
.It Va DEBUG_FLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Similar to
.Va CFLAGS
but it will cause
.Va STRIP
to be set to a blank value, if set.
Typically,
.Va DEBUG_FLAGS
is set to
.Fl g
for compiling with debug symbols.
.It Va NO_CPU_CFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Setting this variable will prevent CPU specific compiler flags
from being automatically added to
.Va CFLAGS
during compile time.
.It Va CXXFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Controls the compiler settings when compiling C++ code.
.Va CXXFLAGS
is initially set to the value of
.Va CFLAGS .
If you want to add to the
.Va CXXFLAGS
value, use
.Dq Li +=
instead of
.Dq Li = .
.It Va INSTALL
.Pq Vt str
the default install command.
To have components compared before doing the install, use
.Bd -literal -offset indent
INSTALL="install -C"
.Ed
.It Va NO_BACKUP
.Pq Vt str
Inhibit automatic backup of world binaries as port of
.Dq installworld
.Xr make 1
target.
Default is unset.
.It Va WORLD_BACKUP
.Pq Vt str
defines where system binaries will be backed up for the
.Dq backupworld
.Xr make 1
target.
The default is
.Dq /var/backups/world_backup .
.It Va AUTO_BACKUP
.Pq Vt str
defines where system binaries will be backed up automatically
as part of the
.Dq installworld
.Xr make 1
target.
The default is
.Dq Ev MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX Ns /world_binaries/ Ns Ev DESTDIR .
.It Va LOCAL_DIRS
.Pq Vt str
List of directories that should be entered when running
.Xr make 1
in
.Pa /usr/src .
.It Va MAKE_SHELL
.Pq Vt str
Controls the shell used internally by
.Xr make 1
to process the command scripts in makefiles.
.Xr sh 1 ,
.Xr ksh 1 ,
and
.Xr csh 1
all currently supported.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
MAKE_SHELL?=sh
.Ed
.It Va MODULES_OVERRIDE
.Pq Vt str
Set to a list of modules to build instead of all of them.
.It Va MTREE_FOLLOWS_SYMLINKS
.Pq Vt str
Set this to
.Dq Fl L
to cause
.Xr mtree 8
to follow symlinks.
.It Va STRIP
.Pq Vt str
Set this to the flag to pass to the
.Xr strip 1
command.
If set to a blank value, debug symbols will not be removed.
.Va STRIP
is automatically set to a blank value if
.Va DEBUG_FLAGS
is set.
.It Va WANT_HESIOD
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to build
.Xr hesiod 3
support into libc.
.It Va NO_NS_CACHING
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to disable name caching in the nsswitch subsystem.
The generic caching daemon,
.Xr nscd 8 ,
will not be built either if this option is set.
.It Va NO_WERROR
Set this if you don't want
.Fl Werror
to be added to
.Va CWARNFLAGS
or used in the kernel build.
.It Va STATIC_LOCALES
.Pq Vt str
Set to a list of locales to build into statically-linked binaries.
Currently supported locales are: BIG5 EUC EUCTW ISO2022 MSKanji UTF8
.El
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are only used doing a kernel build:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va BOOT_COMCONSOLE_PORT
.Pq Vt str
The port address to use for the console if the boot blocks have
been configured to use a serial console instead of the keyboard/video card.
.It Va BOOT_COMCONSOLE_SPEED
.Pq Vt int
The baud rate to use for the console if the boot blocks have
been configured to use a serial console instead of the keyboard/video card.
.It Va COPTFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Controls the compiler settings when building the
kernel.
Optimization levels above
.Fl O
.Pq Fl O2 , No ...
are not guaranteed to work.
.It Va KERNCONF
.Pq Vt str
Controls which kernel configurations will be
built by
.Dq Li "${MAKE} buildkernel"
and installed by
.Dq Li "${MAKE} installkernel" .
For example,
.Bd -literal -offset indent
KERNCONF=MINE DEBUG GENERIC OTHERMACHINE
.Ed
.Pp
will build the kernels specified by the config files
.Pa MINE , DEBUG , GENERIC ,
and
.Pa OTHERMACHINE ,
and install the kernel specified by the config file
.Pa MINE .
It defaults to
.Pa GENERIC .
.It Va NO_CPU_COPTFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Setting this variable will prevent CPU specific compiler flags
from being automatically added to
.Va COPTFLAGS
during compile time.
.It Va NO_KERNELCLEAN
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to skip the clean target when using
.Dq Li "${MAKE} buildkernel" .
.It Va NO_KERNELCONFIG
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to skip running
.Xr config 8
during
.Dq Li "${MAKE} buildkernel" .
.It Va NO_KERNELDEPEND
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to skip running
.Dq Li "${MAKE} depend"
during
.Dq Li "${MAKE} buildkernel" .
.It Va NO_KERNEL_OLD_STRIP
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to skip stripping debugging symbols from old kernel and modules
(kernel.old, modules.old) during
.Dq Li "${MAKE} installkernel" .
.It Va NO_MODULES
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build modules with the kernel.
.El
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are used during the world build:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va ENABLE_SUID_SSH
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to install
.Xr ssh 1
with the setuid bit turned on.
.It Va MODULES_WITH_WORLD
.Pq Vt bool
Set to build modules with the system instead of the kernel.
.It Va NO_ALTBINUTILS
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build the alternative (non-default) set of binutils.
.It Va NO_CRYPT
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build crypto code.
.It Va NO_CVS
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build CVS.
.It Va NO_GAMES
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build games.
.It Va NO_GCC50
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build the alternative version of GCC (5.0).
.It Va NO_GDB
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Xr gdb 1
.It Va NO_LIBC_R
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Nm libc_r
(reentrant version of
.Nm libc ) .
.It Va NO_LPR
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Xr lpr 1
and related programs.
.It Va NO_OPENSSH
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build OpenSSH.
.It Va NO_OPENSSL
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build OpenSSL (implies
.Va NO_OPENSSH ) .
.It Va NO_SHARE
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not enter the share subdirectory.
.It Va NOCLEAN
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to disable cleaning during
.Dq Li "make buildworld" .
This should not be set unless you know what you are doing.
.It Va NOCLEANDIR
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to run
.Dq Li "${MAKE} clean"
instead of
.Dq Li "${MAKE} cleandir" .
.It Va NOFSCHG
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not install certain components with flag schg.
This is useful in a jailed environment.
.It Va NOINFO
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not make or install
.Xr info 5
files.
.It Va NOINFOCOMPRESS
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not compress the info pages.
.It Va NOMAN
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build manual pages
.It Va NOMANCOMPRESS
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not compress the manual pages.
.It Va NOPROFILE
.Pq Vt bool
Set to avoid compiling profiled libraries.
.It Va PPP_NOSUID
.Pq Vt bool
Set to disable the installation of
.Xr ppp 8
with the set-user-ID bit on.
.It Va XAUTH_PATH
.Pq Vt str
The path to the xauth program used by OpenSSH client.
.It Va SENDMAIL_MC
.Pq Vt str
The default
.Xr m4 1
configuration file to use at install time.
The value should include the full path to the
.Pa .mc
file, e.g.,
.Pa /etc/mail/myconfig.mc .
Use with caution as a make install will overwrite any existing
.Pa /etc/mail/sendmail.cf .
.It Va SENDMAIL_SUBMIT_MC
.Pq Vt str
The default
.Xr m4 1
configuration file for mail submission
to use at install time.
The value should include the full path to the
.Pa .mc
file, e.g.,
.Pa /etc/mail/mysubmit.mc .
Use with caution as a make install will overwrite any existing
.Pa /etc/mail/submit.cf .
.It Va SENDMAIL_ADDITIONAL_MC
.Pq Vt str
Additional
.Pa .mc
files which should be built into
.Pa .cf
files at build time.
The value should include the full path to the
.Pa .mc
file(s), e.g.,
.Pa /etc/mail/foo.mc
.Pa /etc/mail/bar.mc .
.It Va SENDMAIL_CF_DIR
.Pq Vt str
Override the default location for the
.Xr m4 1
configuration files used to build a
.Pa .cf
file from a
.Pa .mc
file.
The default is
.Pa /usr/local/share/sendmail/cf .
.It Va SENDMAIL_M4_FLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Flags passed to
.Xr m4 1
when building a
.Pa .cf
file from a
.Pa .mc
file.
.It Va SENDMAIL_MAP_PERMS
.Pq Vt str
Mode to use when generating alias and map database files using
.Pa /etc/mail/Makefile .
The default value is 0640.
.It Va THREAD_LIB
.Pq Vt str
Set to either
.Li c_r
or
.Li thread_xu
to configure the system's default threading library.
The default is
.Li thread_xu .
.It Va WANT_IDEA
.Pq Vt bool
Set to build the IDEA encryption code.
This code is patented in the USA and many European countries.
It is
.Em "YOUR RESPONSIBILITY"
to determine if you can legally use IDEA.
.It Va WANT_INSTALLER
.Pq Vt bool
Set to build the installer.
.It Va WANT_NETGRAPH7
.Pq Vt bool
Set to build a newer, experimental
.Xr netgraph 4
userland.
It has to be accompanied by
.Dv NETGRAPH7*
options in the kernel.
.El
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are used when building documentation.
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va DOC_LANG
.Pq Vt str
The list of languages and encodings to build and install.
.It Va PRINTERDEVICE
.Pq Vt str
The default format for system documentation, depends on your
printer.
This can be set to
.Dq Li ascii
for simple printers or
.Dq Li ps
for postscript or graphics printers with a ghostscript
filter.
.It Va GROFF_PAPER_SIZE
.Pq Vt str
The default paper size for
.Xr groff 1
(either
.Dq letter
or
.Dq A4 ) .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/defaults/make.conf -compact
.It Pa /etc/defaults/make.conf
.It Pa /etc/make.conf
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile.inc1
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gcc 1 ,
.Xr install 1 ,
.Xr make 1 ,
.Xr lpd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file appeared sometime before
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Mike W. Meyer Aq Mt mwm@mired.org .
