.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 The DragonFly Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd February 17, 2018
.Dt NFS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nfs
.Nd nfs network filesystem
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
implements the mount protocol as per in RFC 1094, Appendix A and
.%T "NFS: Network File System Version 3 Protocol Specification" ,
Appendix I.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
MIBs are defined for use with
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va vfs.nfs.access_cache_timeout
.Nm
access cache timeout.
.It Va vfs.nfs.async
Enables unstable and fast writes.
.It Va vfs.nfs.commit_blks
Number of committed blocks.
.It Va vfs.nfs.commit_miss
Number of nfs blocks committed from dirty buffers.
.It vfs.nfs.diskless_rootpath
Prints the host name for mount point.
.It Va vfs.nfs.diskless_swappath
Prints the host name for mount point to swap.
.It Va vfs.nfs.diskless_valid
Prints if diskless params were obtained.
.It Va vfs.nfs.flush_on_hlink
Controls fvp flushing prior to hard link.
.It Va vfs.nfs.flush_on_rename
Controls fvp flushing prior to rename.
.It Va vfs.nfs.gatherdelay
Enables NFS request procrastination.
.It Va vfs.nfs.gatherdelay_v3
Enables NFSv3 request procrastination.
.It Va vfs.nfs.maxasyncbio
Controls maximum number of asynchronous bio's.
.It Va vfs.nfs.neg_cache_timeout
.Nm
negative namecache timeout.
.It Va vfs.nfs.nfs_io_size
Controls the
.Nm
optimal I/O unit size.
.It Va vfs.nfs.nfs_ip_paranoia
Enables no-connection mode for protocols that support no-connection mode.
.It Va vfs.nfs.nfs_privport
Enables privileged source port checks.
.It Va vfs.nfs.nfsv3_commit_on_close
If set, write and commit on close.
If not set, only write on close.
.It Va vfs.nfs.pos_cache_timeout
.Nm
positive namecache timeout.
.It Va vfs.nfs.realign_count
Number of realignments for badly aligned mbuf data.
.It Va vfs.nfs.realign_test
Number of times mbufs have been tested for bad alignment.
.It Va vfs.nfs.showrexmit
Enables retransmits debug prints.
.It Va vfs.nfs.showrtt
Enables round trip time output debug printing.
.It Va vfs.nfs.soreserve
Controls minimum
.Nm
socket buffer size reservation.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vfs 7 ,
.Xr mountd 8 ,
.Xr mount_nfs 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual first appeared in
.Dx 5.1 .
