.\" Copyright (c) 1995
.\"	Jordan K. Hubbard
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man5/rc.conf.5,v 1.197 2003/07/28 13:56:00 mbr Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 4, 2014
.Dt RC.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc.conf
.Nd system configuration information
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Nm
contains descriptive information about the local host name, configuration
details for any potential network interfaces and which services should be
started up at system initial boot time.
In new installations, the
.Nm
file is generally initialized by the installer.
.Pp
The purpose of
.Nm
is not to run commands or perform system startup actions directly.
Instead, it is included by the various generic startup scripts in
.Pa /etc
which conditionalize their
internal actions according to the settings found there.
.Pp
The
.Pa /etc/defaults/rc.conf
file specifies the default settings for all the available options,
the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file specifies override settings.
Options need only be specified in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
when the system administrator wishes to override the defaults.
The file
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
is used to override settings in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
for historical reasons.
In addition to
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
you can also place smaller configuration files for each
.Xr rc 8
script in the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.d
directory, which will be included by the
.Va load_rc_config
function.
For jail configurations you could use the file
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.d/jail
to store jail specific configuration options.
Also see the
.Va rc_conf_files
variable below.
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for each
variable that can be set in the
.Nm
file.
To set a variable of
.Vt bool
type, specify either
.Dq Li YES ,
.Dq Li TRUE ,
.Dq Li ON ,
or
.Dq Li 1 .
To unset, specify
.Dq Li NO ,
.Dq Li FALSE ,
.Dq Li OFF ,
or
.Dq Li 0 .
These values are case insensitive.
The
.Va _enable
postfix in the name of a variable for starting a service can be
omitted (as in
.Nx ) .
.Bl -tag -width indent-two
.It Va rc_debug
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable output of debug messages from rc scripts.
This variable can be helpful in diagnosing mistakes when
editing or integrating new scripts.
Beware that this produces copious output to the terminal and
.Xr syslog 3 .
.It Va rc_info
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
disable informational messages from the rc scripts.
Informational messages are displayed when
a condition that is not serious enough to warrant a warning or an error occurs.
.It Va swapfile
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
no swapfile is installed, otherwise the value is used as the full
pathname to a file to use for additional swap space.
The
.Xr vn 4
driver is needed for a swapfile and will be loaded if it is not
already compiled into the kernel or loaded via
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.It Va apm_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable support for Automatic Power Management with the
.Xr apm 8
command.
.It Va apmd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Run
.Xr apmd 8
to handle APM event from userland.
This also enables support for APM.
.It Va apmd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va apmd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr apmd 8
daemon.
.It Va battd_enable
Enable
.Xr battd 8
to monitor the status of batteries present in the system.
This also enables support for APM.
.It Va battd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va battd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr battd 8
daemon.
.It Va devd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Run
.Xr devd 8
to handle device added, removed or unknown events from the kernel.
.It Va devd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va devd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr devd 8
daemon.
.It Va powerd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li YES
enables
.Xr powerd 8 ,
a CPU speed control daemon.
.It Va sensorsd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li YES
enables
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
a sensors monitoring and logging daemon.
.It Va sensorsd_flags
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
Additional flags passed to the
.Xr sensorsd 8
program.
.It Va sysvipcd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li YES
enables
.Xr sysvipcd 8 ,
a sensors monitoring and logging daemon.
.It Va sysvipcd_flags
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
Additional flags passed to the
.Xr sysvipcd 8
program.
.It Va hotplugd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li YES
enables
.Xr hotplugd 8 ,
a devices hot plugging monitoring daemon.
.It Va hotplugd_flags
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
Additional flags passed to the
.Xr hotplugd 8
program.
.It Va pccard_ifconfig
.Pq Vt str
List of arguments to be passed to
.Xr ifconfig 8
at boot time or on insertion of the card (e.g.\&
.Dq Cm inet Li 192.168.1.1 Cm netmask Li 255.255.255.0
for a fixed address or
.Dq Li DHCP
for a DHCP client).
.It Va pccard_ether_delay
.Pq Vt str
Set the delay before starting
.Xr dhclient 8
in the
.Pa /etc/pccard_ether
script.
This defaults to 5 seconds to work around a bug in the
.Xr ed 4
driver which can lead to system hangs when using some newer
.Xr ed 4
based cards.
.It Va removable_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
List of removable network interfaces to be supported by
.Pa /etc/pccard_ether .
.It Va local_startup
.Pq Vt str
List of directories to search for startup script files.
.It Va script_name_sep
.Pq Vt str
The field separator to use for breaking down the list of startup script files
into individual filenames.
The default is a space.
It is not necessary to change this unless there are startup scripts with names
containing spaces.
.It Va hostapd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start
.Xr hostapd 8
at system boot time.
.It Va hostname
.Pq Vt str
The fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of this host on the network.
This should almost certainly be set to something meaningful, even if
there is no network connection.
If
.Xr dhclient 8
is used to set the hostname via DHCP,
this variable should be set to an empty string.
.It Va ipv6_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Enable support for IPv6 networking.
Note that this requires that the kernel have been compiled with
.Cd "options INET6" .
.It Va nisdomainname
.Pq Vt str
The NIS domain name of this host, or
.Dq Li NO
if NIS is not used.
.It Va dhclient_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to the DHCP client program
(default
.Pa /sbin/dhclient ) .
.It Va dhclient_flags
.Pq Vt str
Additional flags to pass to the DHCP client program.
.It Va pf_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to load
.Xr pf 4
at startup.
If the kernel was not built with
.Cd "device pf" ,
the
.Pa pf.ko
kernel module will be loaded.
See also
.Va firewall_enable .
.It Va pf_rules
.Pq Vt str
Path to the
.Xr pf 4
ruleset definition file.
.It Va pf_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr pfctl 8 .
.It Va pf_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va pf_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr pfctl 8
when loading the ruleset.
.It Va pflog_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to
.Dq Li YES
to enable
.Xr pflogd 8
which logs packets from
.Xr pf 4 .
.It Va pflog_logfile
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va pflog_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
this specifies the path of the log file.
.It Va pflog_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr pflogd 8 .
.It Va pflog_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va pflog_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr pflogd 8 .
.It Va firewall_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to load firewall rules at startup.
If the kernel was not built with
.Cd "options IPFIREWALL" ,
the
.Pa ipfw.ko
kernel module will be loaded.
See also
.Va pf_enable .
.It Va ipv6_firewall_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_enable .
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to load IPv6 firewall rules at startup.
If the kernel was not built with
.Cd "options IPV6FIREWALL" ,
the
.Pa ip6fw.ko
kernel module will be loaded.
.It Va firewall_script
.Pq Vt str
The full path to the firewall script to run
(default
.Pa /etc/rc.firewall ) .
.It Va ipv6_firewall_script
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_script .
.It Va firewall_type
.Pq Vt str
Names the firewall type from the selection in
.Pa /etc/rc.firewall ,
or the file which contains the local firewall ruleset.
Valid selections from
.Pa /etc/rc.firewall
are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Li simple" -compact
.It Li open
unrestricted IP access
.It Li closed
all IP services disabled, except via
.Dq Li lo0
.It Li client
basic protection for a workstation on a LAN
.It Li simple
alias for
.Li client .
.El
.Pp
If a filename is specified, the full path must be given.
.It Va firewall_trusted_nets
.Pq Vt str
List of trusted networks (if
.Va firewall_type
is set to
.Li client ) .
.It Va firewall_trusted_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
List of trusted network interfaces (if
.Va firewall_type
is set to
.Li client ) .
.It Va firewall_allowed_icmp_types
.Pq Vt str
List of allowed ICMP types (if
.Va firewall_type
is set to
.Li client ) .
.It Va firewall_open_tcp_ports
.Pq Vt str
List of TCP ports to open (if
.Va firewall_type
is set to
.Li client ) .
.It Va firewall_open_udp_ports
.Pq Vt str
List of UDP ports to open (if
.Va firewall_type
is set to
.Li client ) .
.It Va ipv6_firewall_type
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_type .
.It Va firewall_quiet
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to disable the display of firewall rules on the console during boot.
.It Va ipv6_firewall_quiet
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_quiet .
.It Va firewall_logging
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable firewall event logging.
This is equivalent to the
.Dv IPFIREWALL_VERBOSE
kernel option.
.It Va ipv6_firewall_logging
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_logging .
.It Va firewall_flags
.Pq Vt str
Flags passed to
.Xr ipfw 8
if
.Va firewall_type
specifies a filename.
.It Va ipv6_firewall_flags
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_flags .
.It Va natd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr natd 8 .
.It Va natd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable
.Xr natd 8 .
.Va firewall_enable
must also be set to
.Dq Li YES ,
and
.Xr divert 4
sockets must be enabled in the kernel.
.It Va natd_interface
.Pq Vt str
This is the name of the public interface on which
.Xr natd 8
should run.
The interface may be given as an interface name or as an IP address.
.It Va natd_flags
.Pq Vt str
Additional
.Xr natd 8
flags should be placed here.
The
.Fl n
or
.Fl a
flag is automatically added with the above
.Va natd_interface
as an argument.
.It Va tcp_extensions
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li NO
disables certain TCP options as described by
.Rs
.%T "RFC 1323"
.Re
Setting this to
.Dq Li NO
might help remedy such problems with connections as randomly hanging
or other weird behavior.
Some network devices are known to be broken with respect to these options.
.It Va log_in_vain
.Pq Vt int
Set to 0 by default.
The
.Xr sysctl 8
variables,
.Va net.inet.tcp.log_in_vain
and
.Va net.inet.udp.log_in_vain ,
as described in
.Xr tcp 4
and
.Xr udp 4 ,
are set to the given value.
.It Va tcp_keepalive
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li NO
will disable probing idle TCP connections to verify that the
peer is still up and reachable.
.It Va tcp_drop_synfin
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li YES
will cause the kernel to ignore TCP frames that have both
the SYN and FIN flags set.
This prevents OS fingerprinting, but may break some legitimate applications.
This option is only available if the kernel was built with the
.Dv TCP_DROP_SYNFIN
option.
.It Va icmp_drop_redirect
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li YES
will cause the kernel to ignore ICMP REDIRECT packets.
Refer to
.Xr icmp 4
for more information.
.It Va icmp_log_redirect
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li YES
will cause the kernel to log ICMP REDIRECT packets.
Note that
the log messages are not rate-limited, so this option should only be used
for troubleshooting networks.
Refer to
.Xr icmp 4
for more information.
.It Va icmp_bmcastecho
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to respond to broadcast or multicast ICMP ping packets.
Refer to
.Xr icmp 4
for more information.
.It Va ip_portrange_first
.Pq Vt int
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the first port in the default portrange.
Refer to
.Xr ip 4
for more information.
.It Va ip_portrange_last
.Pq Vt int
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the last port in the default portrange.
Refer to
.Xr ip 4
for more information.
.\"
.It Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
.Pq Vt str
Configuration for
.Dq interface .
Typically includes IP address.
Assuming that the interface in question was
.Li ed0 ,
it might look something like this:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0="inet 10.0.0.1 netmask 0xffff0000"
.Ed
.Pp
If the
.Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface
file is present, it is read and executed by the
.Xr sh 1
interpreter before configuring the interface as specified in the
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
and
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _alias Ns Aq Ar n
variables.
.Pp
It is possible to bring up an interface with DHCP by adding
.Dq Li DHCP
to the
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable.
For instance, to initialize the
.Li ed0
device via DHCP, it is possible to use something like:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0="DHCP"
.Ed
.Pp
If a
.Va wlans_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable is set,
an
.Xr wlan 4
interface will be created for each item in the list with the
.Ar wlandev
argument set to
.Ar interface .
Further wlan cloning arguments may be passed to the
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm create
command by setting the
.Va create_args_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable.
One or more
.Xr wlan 4
devices must be created for each wireless devices as of
.Dx 2.5 .
Debugging flags for
.Xr wlan 4
devices as set by
.Xr wlandebug 8
may be specified with an
.Va wlandebug_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable.
The contents of this variable will be passed directly to
.Xr wlandebug 8 .
.Pp
Also, if your interface needs WPA authentication, it is possible to add
.Dq Li WPA
to the
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable.
This will start
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8 .
See
.Xr wpa_supplicant.conf 5
for configuring authentication information.
.Pp
Finally, you can add
.Xr ifconfig 8
options in this variable, in addition to the
.Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface
file.
For instance, to initialize the
.Li wi0
device via DHCP, using WPA authentication and 802.11b mode, it is
possible to use something like:
.Bd -literal
wlans_wi0="wlan0"
ifconfig_wlan0="up DHCP WPA mode 11b"
.Ed
.It Va ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _alias Ns Aq Ar n
.Pq Vt str
Configuration to establish an additional network address for
.Dq interface .
Assuming that the interface in question was
.Li ed0 ,
it might look something like this:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0_alias0="inet 127.0.0.253 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias1="inet 127.0.0.254 netmask 0xffffffff"
.Ed
.Pp
And so on.
For each
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _alias Ns Aq Ar n
entry that is found, its contents are passed to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
Execution stops at the first unsuccessful access, so if
something like this is present:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0_alias0="inet 127.0.0.251 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias1="inet 127.0.0.252 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias2="inet 127.0.0.253 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias4="inet 127.0.0.254 netmask 0xffffffff"
.Ed
.Pp
Then note that alias4 would
.Em not
be added since the search would stop with the missing alias3 entry.
.It Va ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _name
.Pq Vt str
New name for
.Dq interface .
It is possible to rename interface by doing:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0_name="net0"
ifconfig_net0="inet 10.0.0.1 netmask 0xffff0000"
.Ed
.It Va network_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
The list of network interfaces to configure on this host,
or
.Dq Li auto
to configure all network interfaces
(default
.Dq Li auto ) .
For example, if the only network devices to be configured are the loopback device
.Pq Li lo0
and a NIC using the
.Xr ed 4
driver, this could be set to
.Dq Li "lo0 ed0" .
An
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable is assumed to exist for each value of
.Ar interface .
.It Va ipv6_network_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
This is the IPv6 equivalent of
.Va network_interfaces .
Instead of setting the ifconfig variables as
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
they should be set as
.Va ipv6_ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface .
Aliases should be set as
.Va ipv6_ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _alias Ns Aq Ar n .
Interfaces that do not have a
.Va ipv6_ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
setting will be auto configured by
.Xr rtsol 8
if the
.Va ipv6_gateway_enable
is set to
.Dq Li NO .
Note that the IPv6 networking code does not support the
.Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface
files.
.It Va ipv6_prefix_ Ns Aq Ar interface
.Pq Vt str
Assign prefix to
.Ar interface ,
prefixlen 64 is used.
.It Va ipv6_default_interface
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the default output interface for scoped addresses.
Now this works only for IPv6 link local multicast addresses.
.It Va cloned_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of clonable network interfaces to create on this host.
Entries in
.Va cloned_interfaces
are automatically appended to
.Va network_interfaces
for configuration.
.It Va gif_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of
.Xr gif 4
tunnel interfaces to configure on this host.
A
.Va gifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable is assumed to exist for each value of
.Ar interface .
The value of this variable is used to configure the link layer of the
tunnel according to the syntax of the
.Cm tunnel
option to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
Additionally, this option ensures that each listed interface is created via the
.Cm create
option to
.Xr ifconfig 8
before attempting to configure it.
.It Va sppp_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of
.Xr sppp 4
interfaces to configure on this host.
A
.Va spppconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable is assumed to exist for each value of
.Ar interface .
Each interface should also be configured by a general
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
setting.
Refer to
.Xr spppcontrol 8
for more information about available options.
.It Va ppp_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ppp 8
daemon.
.It Va ppp_mode
.Pq Vt str
Mode in which to run the
.Xr ppp 8
daemon.
Accepted modes are
.Dq Li auto ,
.Dq Li ddial ,
.Dq Li direct
and
.Dq Li dedicated .
See the manual for a full description.
.It Va ppp_nat
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enables network address translation.
Used in conjunction with
.Va gateway_enable
allows hosts on private network addresses access to the Internet using
this host as a network address translating router.
.It Va ppp_profile
.Pq Vt str
The name of the profile to use from
.Pa /etc/ppp/ppp.conf .
.It Va ppp_user
.Pq Vt str
The name of the user under which
.Xr ppp 8
should be started.
By default,
.Xr ppp 8
is started as
.Dq Li root .
.It Va rc_conf_files
.Pq Vt str
This option is used to specify a list of files that will override
the settings in
.Pa /etc/defaults/rc.conf .
The files will be read in the order in which they are specified and should
include the full path to the file.
By default, the files specified are
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
and
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
.It Va fsck_y_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Xr fsck 8
will be run with the
.Fl y
flag if the initial preen of the file systems fails.
.It Va netfs_types
.Pq Vt str
List of file system types that are network-based.
This list should generally not be modified by end users.
Use
.Va extra_netfs_types
instead.
.It Va extra_netfs_types
.Pq Vt str
If set to something other than
.Dq Li NO
(the default), this variable extends the list of file system types
for which automatic mounting at startup by
.Xr rc 8
should be delayed until the network is initialized.
It should contain
a whitespace-separated list of network file system descriptor pairs,
each consisting of a file system type as passed to
.Xr mount 8
and a human-readable, one-word description, joined with a colon
.Pq Ql \&: .
Extending the default list in this way is only necessary
when third party file system types are used.
.It Va devfs_config_files
.Pq Vt str
This option is used to specify a list of configuration files containing
.Xr devfs 5
rules that will be applied by
.Xr devfsctl 8
in the order in which they are specified and must include the full path
to the file.
.It Va syslogd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr syslogd 8
daemon.
.It Va syslogd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr syslogd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/syslogd ) .
.It Va syslogd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va syslogd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr syslogd 8 .
.It Va inetd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr inetd 8
daemon.
.It Va inetd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr inetd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/inetd ) .
.It Va inetd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va inetd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr inetd 8 .
.It Va rwhod_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rwhod 8
daemon at boot time.
.It Va rwhod_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rwhod_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to it.
.It Va amd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr amd 8
daemon at boot time.
.It Va amd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va amd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to it.
See the
.Xr amd 8
manpage for more information.
.It Va amd_map_program
.Pq Vt str
If set, the specified program is run to get the list of
.Xr amd 8
maps.
For example, if the
.Xr amd 8
maps are stored in NIS, one can set this to run
.Xr ypcat 1
to get a list of
.Xr amd 8
maps from the
.Pa amd.master
NIS map.
.It Va update_motd
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Pa /etc/motd
will be updated at boot time to reflect the kernel release being run.
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
.Pa /etc/motd
will not be updated.
.It Va nfs_client_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
setup NFS client parameters at boot time.
.It Va nfs_access_cache
.Pq Vt int
If
.Va nfs_client_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this can be set to
.Dq Li 0
to disable NFS ACCESS RPC caching, or to the number of seconds for which
NFS ACCESS results should be cached.
A value of 2-10 seconds will substantially reduce network traffic for
many NFS operations.
The default is 5 seconds.
Note that the attribute cache holds stat information only.
The NFS data cache is independent of the attribute cache and is only
invalidated when the client detects that the server has modified the
underlying file.
This value specifies a maximum timeout.
The NFS client will automatically use a shorter timeout for files which
have been recently modified.
.It Va nfs_neg_cache
.Pq Vt int
If
.Va nfs_client_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this can be set to
.Dq Li 0
to disable the caching of NEGATIVE LOOKUPS (lookups of non-existent
filenames), or to the number of seconds for which negative lookups should
be cached.
A value of 2-10 seconds will substantially reduce network
traffic for many NFS operations, especially source code builds.
The default is 3 seconds.
.It Va nfs_server_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the NFS server daemons at boot time.
.It Va nfs_server_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nfs_server_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr nfsd 8
daemon.
.It Va mountd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
and no
.Va nfs_server_enable
is set, start
.Xr mountd 8 ,
but not
.Xr nfsd 8
daemon.
It is commonly needed to run CFS without real NFS used.
.It Va mountd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va mountd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr mountd 8
daemon.
.It Va weak_mountd_authentication
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
allow services like PCNFSD to make non-privileged mount requests.
.It Va nfs_reserved_port_only
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
provide NFS services only on a secure port.
.It Va nfs_bufpackets
.Pq Vt int
If set to a number, indicates the number of packets worth of
socket buffer space to reserve on an NFS client.
The kernel default is typically 4.
Using a higher number may be useful on gigabit networks to improve performance.
The minimum value is 2 and the maximum is 64.
.It Va rpc_umntall_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
(default) and we are also an NFS client, run
.Xr rpc.umntall 8
at boot time to clear out old mounts on remote servers.
If set to
.Dq Li NO
then
.Xr rpc.umntall 8
will not be run at boot time.
.It Va rpc_lockd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
and also an NFS server, run
.Xr rpc.lockd 8
at boot time.
.It Va rpc_lockd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rpc_lockd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr rpc.lockd 8 .
.It Va rpc_statd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
and also an NFS server, run
.Xr rpc.statd 8
at boot time.
.It Va rpc_statd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rpc_statd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr rpc.statd 8 .
.It Va rpcbind_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to program for rpcbind daemon
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/rpcbind ) .
.It Va rpcbind_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run
.Va rpcbind_program
at boot time.
.It Va rpcbind_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rpcbind_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Va rpcbind_program .
.It Va keyserv_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr keyserv 8
daemon on boot for running Secure RPC.
.It Va keyserv_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va keyserv_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr keyserv 8
daemon.
.It Va pppoed_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr pppoed 8
daemon at boot time to provide PPP over Ethernet services.
.It Va pppoed_provider
.Pq Vt str
.Xr pppoed 8
listens to requests to this provider and ultimately runs
.Xr ppp 8
with a
.Ar system
argument of the same name.
.It Va pppoed_flags
.Pq Vt str
Additional flags to pass to
.Xr pppoed 8 .
.It Va pppoed_interface
.Pq Vt str
The network interface to run
.Xr pppoed 8
on.
This is mandatory when
.Va pppoed_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
.It Va timed_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr timed 8
service at boot time.
This command is intended for networks of machines where a consistent
.Dq "network time"
for all hosts must be established.
This is often useful in large NFS environments where time stamps on
files are expected to be consistent network-wide.
.It Va timed_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va timed_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr timed 8
service.
.It Va dntpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run
.Xr dntpd 8
at system boot time.
.It Va dntpd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr dntpd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/dntpd ) .
.It Va dntpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va dntpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr dntpd 8
daemon.
.It Va btconfig_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
configure Bluetooth devices via
.Xr btconfig 8
at system boot time.
.It Va btconfig_devices
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va btconfig_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the list of Bluetooth devices to configure.
If
.Va btconfig_devices
is not specified, all devices known to the system will be configured.
A
.Va btconfig_ Ns Aq Ar device
variable can be set to specify parameters to be passed to
.Ar device .
.It Va btconfig_args
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va btconfig_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the list of configuration parameters to pass to all Bluetooth
devices.
.It Va sdpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the Service Discovery Profile daemon
.Xr ( sdpd 8 )
at system boot time.
.It Va sdpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va sdpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr sdpd 8
daemon.
.It Va bthcid_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the Bluetooth Link Key/PIN Code Manager daemon
.Xr ( bthcid 8 )
at system boot time.
.It Va bthcid_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va bthcid_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr bthcid 8
daemon.
.It Va nis_client_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ypbind 8
service at system boot time.
.It Va nis_client_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_client_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ypbind 8
service.
.It Va nis_ypset_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ypset 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_ypset_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_ypset_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ypset 8
daemon.
.It Va nis_server_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ypserv 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_server_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_server_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ypserv 8
daemon.
.It Va nis_ypxfrd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rpc.ypxfrd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_ypxfrd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_ypxfrd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rpc.ypxfrd 8
daemon.
.It Va nis_yppasswdd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rpc.yppasswdd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_yppasswdd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_yppasswdd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rpc.yppasswdd 8
daemon.
.It Va rpc_ypupdated_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Nm rpc.ypupdated
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va defaultrouter
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
create a default route to this host name or IP address
(use an IP address if this router is also required to get to the
name server!).
.It Va ipv6_defaultrouter
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va defaultrouter .
.It Va static_routes
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of static routes that are to be added at system boot time.
If not set to
.Dq Li NO
then for each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, a
.Va route_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist whose contents will later be passed to a
.Dq Nm route Cm add
operation.
.It Va change_routes
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of static routes that are to be changed at system boot time
(such as those added by the kernel).
If not set to
.Dq Li NO
then for each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, a
.Va change_route_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist whose contents will later be passed to a
.Dq Nm route Cm change
operation.
.It Va ipv6_static_routes
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va static_routes .
If not set to
.Dq Li NO
then for each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, a
.Va ipv6_route_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist whose contents will later be passed to a
.Dq Nm route Cm add Fl inet6
operation.
.It Va gateway_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
configure host to act as an IP router, e.g. to forward packets
between interfaces.
.It Va ipv6_gateway_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va gateway_enable .
.It Va router_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run a routing daemon of some sort, based on the settings of
.Va router_program
and
.Va router_flags .
.It Va ipv6_router_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va router_enable .
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run a routing daemon of some sort, based on the settings of
.Va ipv6_router_program
and
.Va ipv6_router_flags .
.It Va router_program
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va router_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the name of the routing daemon to use
(default
.Pa /sbin/routed ) .
.It Va ipv6_router_program
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va router_program
(default
.Pa /sbin/route6d ) .
.It Va router_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va router_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the routing daemon.
.It Va ipv6_router_flags
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va router_flags .
.It Va mrouted_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the multicast routing daemon,
.Xr mrouted 8 .
.It Va mroute6d_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va mrouted_enable .
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the IPv6 multicast routing daemon.
Note that no IPv6 multicast routing daemon is included in the
.Dx
base system but
.Xr pim6dd 8
can be installed from the
.Xr pkgsrc 7
collection.
.It Va mrouted_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va mrouted_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr mrouted 8
daemon.
.It Va mroute6d_flags
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va mrouted_flags .
If
.Va mroute6d_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags passed to the IPv6 multicast routing daemon.
.It Va mroute6d_program
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va mroute6d_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the path to the IPv6 multicast routing daemon.
.It Va rtadvd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rtadvd 8
daemon at boot time.
.Xr rtadvd 8
will only run if
.Va ipv6_gateway_enable
is also set to
.Dq Li YES .
The
.Xr rtadvd 8
utility sends router advertisement packets to the interfaces specified in
.Va rtadvd_interfaces .
.Xr rtadvd 8
and should only be enabled with great care.
You may want to fine-tune
.Xr rtadvd.conf 5 .
.It Va rtadvd_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rtadvd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
this is the list of interfaces to use.
.It Va rtsold_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rtsold 8
daemon at boot time.
The
.Xr rtsold 8
daemon is used for automatic discovery of non-link local addresses.
.It Va rtsold_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rtsold_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rtsold 8
daemon.
.It Va arpproxy_all
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable global proxy ARP.
.It Va forward_sourceroute
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
and
.Va gateway_enable
is also set to
.Dq Li YES ,
source-routed packets are forwarded.
.It Va accept_sourceroute
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the system will accept source-routed packets directed at it.
.It Va rarpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rarpd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va rarpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rarpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rarpd 8
daemon.
.It Va bootparamd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr bootparamd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va bootparamd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va bootparamd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr bootparamd 8
daemon.
.It Va stf_interface_ipv4addr
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the local IPv4 address for 6to4 (IPv6 over IPv4 tunneling interface).
Specify this entry to enable the 6to4 interface.
.It Va stf_interface_ipv4plen
.Pq Vt int
Prefix length for 6to4 IPv4 addresses, to limit peer address range.
An effective value is 0-31.
.It Va stf_interface_ipv6_ifid
.Pq Vt str
IPv6 interface ID for
.Xr stf 4 .
This can be set to
.Dq Li AUTO .
.It Va stf_interface_ipv6_slaid
.Pq Vt str
IPv6 Site Level Aggregator for
.Xr stf 4 .
.It Va ipv6_faith_prefix
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the faith prefix to enable a FAITH IPv6-to-IPv4 TCP translator.
You also need
.Xr faithd 8
setup.
.It Va ipv6_ipv4mapping
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
this enables IPv4 mapped IPv6 address communication (like
.Li ::ffff:a.b.c.d ) .
.It Va keybell
.Pq Vt str
The keyboard bell sound.
Set to
.Dq Li normal ,
.Dq Li visual ,
.Dq Li off ,
or
.Dq Li NO
if the default behavior is desired.
For details, refer to the
.Xr kbdcontrol 1
manpage.
.It Va keymap
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
no keymap is installed, otherwise the value is used to install
the keymap file in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/keymaps/ Ns Ao Ar value Ac Ns Pa .kbd .
.It Va keyrate
.Pq Vt str
The keyboard repeat speed.
Set to
.Dq Li slow ,
.Dq Li normal ,
.Dq Li fast ,
or
.Dq Li NO
if the default behavior is desired.
.It Va keychange
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
attempt to program the function keys with the value.
The value should be a single string of the form:
.Dq Ar funkey_number new_value Op Ar funkey_number new_value ... .
.It Va cursor
.Pq Vt str
Can be set to the value of
.Dq Li normal ,
.Dq Li blink ,
.Dq Li destructive ,
or
.Dq Li NO
to set the cursor behavior explicitly or choose the default behavior.
.It Va scrnmap
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
no screen map is installed, otherwise the value is used to install
the screen map file in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/scrnmaps/ Ns Aq Ar value .
.It Va font8x16
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default 8x16 font value is used for screen size requests, otherwise
the value in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/fonts/ Ns Aq Ar value
is used.
.It Va font8x14
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default 8x14 font value is used for screen size requests, otherwise
the value in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/fonts/ Ns Aq Ar value
is used.
.It Va font8x8
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default 8x8 font value is used for screen size requests, otherwise
the value in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/fonts/ Ns Aq Ar value
is used.
.It Va blanktime
.Pq Vt int
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default screen blanking interval is used, otherwise it is set to
.Ar value
seconds.
.It Va saver
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the actual screen saver to use
.Li ( blank , snake , daemon ,
etc).
.It Va moused_enable
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the
.Xr moused 8
daemon is started for doing cut/paste selection on the console.
.It Va moused_type
.Pq Vt str
This is the protocol type of the mouse connected to this host.
This variable must be set if
.Va moused_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
The
.Xr moused 8
daemon
is able to detect the appropriate mouse type automatically in many cases.
Set this variable to
.Dq Li auto
to let the daemon detect it, or
select one from the following list if the automatic detection fails.
.Pp
If the mouse is attached to the PS/2 mouse port, choose
.Dq Li auto
or
.Dq Li ps/2 ,
regardless of the brand and model of the mouse.
Likewise, if the mouse is attached to the bus mouse port, choose
.Dq Li auto
or
.Dq Li busmouse .
All other protocols are for serial mice and will not work with
the PS/2 and bus mice.
If this is a USB mouse,
.Dq Li auto
is the only protocol type which will work.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Li x10mouseremote" -compact
.It Li microsoft
Microsoft mouse (serial)
.It Li intellimouse
Microsoft IntelliMouse (serial)
.It Li mousesystems
Mouse systems Corp. mouse (serial)
.It Li mmseries
MM Series mouse (serial)
.It Li logitech
Logitech mouse (serial)
.It Li busmouse
A bus mouse
.It Li mouseman
Logitech MouseMan and TrackMan (serial)
.It Li glidepoint
ALPS GlidePoint (serial)
.It Li thinkingmouse
Kensington ThinkingMouse (serial)
.It Li ps/2
PS/2 mouse
.It Li mmhittab
MM HitTablet (serial)
.It Li x10mouseremote
X10 MouseRemote (serial)
.It Li versapad
Interlink VersaPad (serial)
.El
.Pp
Even if the mouse is not in the above list, it may be compatible
with one in the list.
Refer to the man page for
.Xr moused 8
for compatibility information.
.Pp
It should also be noted that while this is enabled, any
other client of the mouse (such as an X server) should access
the mouse through the virtual mouse device,
.Pa /dev/sysmouse ,
and configure it as a
.Dq Li sysmouse
type mouse, since all
mouse data is converted to this single canonical format when using
.Xr moused 8 .
If the client program does not support the
.Dq Li sysmouse
type, specify the
.Dq Li mousesystems
type.
It is the second preferred type.
.It Va moused_port
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va moused_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the actual port the mouse is on.
It might be
.Pa /dev/cuaa0
for a COM1 serial mouse or
.Pa /dev/psm0
for a PS/2 mouse, for example.
.It Va moused_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va moused_type
is set, these are the additional flags to pass to the
.Xr moused 8
daemon.
.It Va mousechar_start
.Pq Vt int
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default mouse cursor character range
.Li 0xd0 Ns - Ns Li 0xd3
is used, otherwise the range start is set to
.Ar value
character, see
.Xr vidcontrol 1 .
Use if the default range is occupied in the language code table.
.It Va vidhistory
.Pq Vt int
Set the size of the history (scrollback) buffer in lines.
.It Va allscreens_flags
.Pq Vt str
If set,
.Xr vidcontrol 1
is run with these options for each of the virtual terminals
.Pq Pa /dev/ttyv* .
For example,
.Dq Fl m Cm on
will enable the mouse pointer on all virtual terminals if
.Va moused_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
.It Va allscreens_kbdflags
.Pq Vt str
If set,
.Xr kbdcontrol 1
is run with these options for each of the virtual terminals
.Pq Pa /dev/ttyv* .
For example,
.Dq Fl h Li 200
will set the
.Xr syscons 4
scrollback (history) buffer to 200 lines.
.It Va cron_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr cron 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va cron_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr cron 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/cron ) .
.It Va cron_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va cron_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr cron 8 .
.It Va lpd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr lpd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/lpd ) .
.It Va lpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr lpd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va lpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va lpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr lpd 8
daemon.
.It Va nscd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr nscd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va mixer_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
preserve
.Xr mixer 8
settings across reboots.
.It Va mta_start_script
.Pq Vt str
The full path to the script to run to start
a mail transfer agent.
The default is
.Pa /etc/rc.sendmail .
The
.Va sendmail_*
variables which
.Pa /etc/rc.sendmail
uses are documented in the
.Xr rc.sendmail 8
man page.
.It Va fixbootfile
.Pq Vt bool
In a
.Sq HAMMER ROOT with UFS /boot
setup, the boot loader will not set up the
.Va kern.bootfile
sysctl correctly.
The system will attempt to fix this on its own.
Set this variable to
.Dq Li NO
to turn this behavior off.
.It Va dumpdev
.Pq Vt str
Indicates the device (usually a swap partition) to which a crash dump
should be written in the event of a system crash.
The value of this variable is passed as the argument to
.Xr dumpon 8
and
.Xr savecore 8 .
To disable crash dumps, set this variable to
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va dumpdir
.Pq Vt str
When the system reboots after a crash and a crash dump is found on the
device specified by the
.Va dumpdev
variable,
.Xr savecore 8
will save that crash dump and a copy of the kernel to the directory
specified by the
.Va dumpdir
variable.
The default value is
.Pa /var/crash .
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to not run
.Xr savecore 8
at boot time when
.Va dumpdir
is set.
.It Va savecore_flags
.Pq Vt str
If crash dumps are enabled, these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr savecore 8
utility.
.It Va crashinfo_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to turn on automatic crash dump summary generation using the utility
specified by the
.Va crashinfo_program
variable.
.It Va crashinfo_program
.Pq Vt str
Program to run to generate a crash dump summary if the variable
.Va crashinfo_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
The default value is
.Pa /usr/sbin/crashinfo .
.It Va enable_quotas
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to turn on user disk quotas on system startup via the
.Xr quotaon 8
command.
.It Va check_quotas
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable user disk quota checking via the
.Xr quotacheck 8
command.
.It Va accounting_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable system accounting through the
.Xr accton 8
facility.
.It Va linux_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable Linux/ELF binary emulation at system initial boot time.
.It Va sysvipc_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
load System V IPC primitives at boot time.
.\" ----- cleanvar_enable setting--------------------------------
.It Va cleanvar_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to have
.Pa /var/run ,
.Pa /var/spool/lock
and
.Pa /var/spool/uucp/.Temp/*
cleaned at startup.
.\" ----- clear_tmp_enable setting-------------------------------
.It Va clear_tmp_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to have
.Pa /tmp
cleaned at startup.
.\" ----- ldconfig_paths setting --------------------------------
.It Va ldconfig_paths
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of shared library paths to use with
.Xr ldconfig 8 .
NOTE:
.Pa /usr/lib
will always be added first, so it need not appear in this list.
.It Va ldconfig_insecure
.Pq Vt bool
The
.Xr ldconfig 8
utility normally refuses to use directories
which are writable by anyone except root.
Set this variable to
.Dq Li YES
to disable that security check during system startup.
.It Va ldconfig_local_dirs
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of local
.Xr ldconfig 8
directories.
The names of all files in the directories listed will be
passed as arguments to
.Xr ldconfig 8 .
.It Va kern_securelevel
.Pq Vt int
The kernel security level to set at startup.
The allowed range of
.Ar value
ranges from \-1 (the compile time default) to 3 (the most secure).
See
.Xr init 8
for the list of possible security levels and their effect on system operation.
.It Va start_vinum
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start
.Xr vinum 8
at system boot time.
.It Va sshd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start
.Xr sshd 8
at system boot time.
.It Va sshd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to the SSH server program
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/sshd ) .
.It Va sshd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va sshd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr sshd 8
daemon.
.It Va ftpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start
.Xr ftpd 8
at system boot time.
.It Va ftpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va ftpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ftpd 8
daemon.
.It Va usbd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr usbd 8
daemon at boot time.
.It Va usbd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va usbd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags passed to
.Xr usbd 8
daemon.
.It Va watchdogd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
start the
.Xr watchdogd 8
daemon at boot time.
This requires that the kernel have been compiled with
.Cd "options WATCHDOG" .
.It Va jail_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
any configured jails will not be started.
.It Va jail_list
.Pq Vt str
A space separated list of names for jails.
This is purely a configuration aid to help identify and
configure multiple jails.
The names specified in this list will be used to
identify settings common to an instance of a jail.
Assuming that the jail in question was named
.Li vjail ,
you would have the following dependent variables:
.Bd -literal
jail_vjail_hostname="jail.example.com"
jail_vjail_ip="192.168.1.100"
jail_vjail_rootdir="/var/jails/vjail/root"
.Ed
.It Va jail_flags
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
When set, use as default value for
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _flags
for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_interface
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
When set, use as default value for
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _interface
for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_fstab
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
When set, use as default value for
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _fstab
for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_mount_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
sets
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _mount_enable
to
.Dq Li YES
by default for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_fdesc_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
sets
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _fdesc_enable
to
.Dq Li YES
by default for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_procfs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
sets
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _procfs_enable
to
.Dq Li YES
by default for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_devfs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
sets
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _devfs_enable
to
.Dq Li YES
by default for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_exec_start
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
When set, use as default value for
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _exec_start
for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_exec_stop
Unset by default.
When set, use as default value for
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _exec_stop
for every jail in
.Va jail_list .
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _rootdir
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
Set to the root directory used by jail
.Va jname .
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _hostname
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
Set to the fully qualified domain name (FQDN) assigned to jail
.Va jname .
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _ip
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
Set to the IP address assigned to jail
.Va jname .
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _flags
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li -l -U root
by default.
These are flags to pass to
.Xr jail 8 .
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _interface
.Pq Vt str
Unset by default.
When set, sets the interface to use when setting IP address alias.
Note that the alias is created at jail startup and removed at jail shutdown.
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _fstab
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Pa /etc/fstab. Ns Aq Ar jname
by default.
This is the file system information file to use for jail
.Va jname .
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _mount_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
mount all file systems from
.Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _fstab
at jail startup.
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _fdesc_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
mount the file-descriptor file system inside jail
.Ar jname
at jail startup.
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _procfs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
mount the process file system inside jail
.Ar jname
at jail startup.
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _devfs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
mount the device file system inside jail
.Ar jname
at jail startup.
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _exec_start
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li /bin/sh /etc/rc
by default.
This is the command executed at jail startup.
.It Va jail_ Ns Ao Ar jname Ac Ns Va _exec_stop
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li /bin/sh /etc/rc.shutdown
by default.
This is the command executed at jail shutdown.
.It Va jail_set_hostname_allow
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
do not allow the root user in a jail to set its hostname.
.It Va jail_socket_unixiproute_only
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
do not allow any sockets,
besides UNIX/IP/route sockets,
to be used within a jail.
.It Va jail_sysvipc_allow
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
allow applications within a jail to use System V IPC.
.It Va lvm_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
LVM volumes will be discovered and configured on boot.
.It Va newsyslog_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run
.Xr newsyslog 8
before syslogd starts.
.It Va newsyslog_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va newsyslog_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags passed to
.Xr newsyslog 8 .
.It Va resident_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
make the dynamic binaries listed in
.Pa /etc/resident.conf
resident.
.It Va varsym_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
process
.Pa /etc/varsym.conf
to set system-wide variables for variant symlinks.
.It Va rand_irqs
.Pq Vt str
Set either to
.Dq Li NO
or a whitespace separated list of IRQ numbers which will be used as a source of
randomness.
.\" -----------------------------------------------------
.It Va entropy_dir
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to disable caching entropy via
.Xr cron 8 .
Otherwise set to the directory used to store entropy files in.
.It Va entropy_file
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to disable caching entropy through reboots.
Otherwise set to the filename used to store cached entropy through reboots.
This file should be located on the root file system to seed the
.Xr random 4
device as early as possible in the boot process.
.It Va ipsec_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to run
.Xr setkey 8
on
.Va ipsec_file
at boot time.
.It Va ipsec_file
.Pq Vt str
Configuration file for
.Xr setkey 8 .
.It Va dmesg_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to save
.Xr dmesg 8
to
.Pa /var/run/dmesg.boot
on boot.
.It Va rcshutdown_timeout
.Pq Vt int
If set, start a watchdog timer in the background which will terminate
.Pa rc.shutdown
if
.Xr shutdown 8
has not completed within the specified time (in seconds).
Notice that in addition to this soft timeout,
.Xr init 8
also applies a hard timeout for the execution of
.Pa rc.shutdown .
This is configured via
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
.Va kern.init_shutdown_timeout
and defaults to 120 seconds. Setting the value of
.Va rcshutdown_timeout
to more than 120 seconds will have no effect until the
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
.Va kern.init_shutdown_timeout
is also increased.
.It Va udevd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the udevd daemon will be started on boot.
.It Va vfs_quota_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
vfs quota rc.d scripts will be run on boot.
.It Va vfs_quota_sync
.Pq Vt str
List of mount points whose counters are to be synchronized with on-disk
usage during system startup. See also
.Xr vquota 8 .
.It Va vknetd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Xr vknetd 8
will be started on boot.
.It Va vknetd_flags
.Pq Vt bool
Additional flags passed to
.Xr vknetd 8 .
Usually address/cidrbits is specified here.
When no flags are passed, default option
.Fl U
will be used.
.It Va vkernel_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
any configured vkernels will not be started.
.It Va vkernel_kill_timeout
.Pq Vt int
This defines the default number of seconds that we will wait for the
vkernel to shut down on it's own. If after this time it's still alive,
it will be killed with SIGKILL.
.It Va vkernel_bin
.Pq Vt str
Defines the default path to the vkernel binary.
.It Va vkernel_list
.Pq Vt str
A space separated list of names for vkernels.
This is purely a configuration aid to help identify and
configure multiple vkernels.
The names specified in this list will be used to
identify settings common to a vkernel instance.
Assuming that the vkernel in question was named
.Li example ,
you would have the following dependent variables
(filled with reference values in this text):
.Bd -literal
vkernel_example_bin="/usr/obj/usr/src/sys/VKERNEL/kernel.debug"
vkernel_example_memsize="64m"
vkernel_example_rootimg_list="/var/vkernel/rootimg.01"
vkernel_example_iface_list="auto:bridge0"
vkernel_example_logfile="/dev/null"
vkernel_example_flags="-U"
vkernel_example_kill_timeout="45"
.Ed
.Pp
The last five are optional.
They default to an empty string if not set, except for logfile which defaults to
.Pa /dev/null
if it is not set.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface" -compact
.It Pa /etc/defaults/rc.conf
.It Pa /etc/rc.conf
.It Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
.It Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr catman 1 ,
.Xr gdb 1 ,
.Xr info 1 ,
.Xr kbdcontrol 1 ,
.Xr varsym 1 ,
.Xr vidcontrol 1 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr ipfw 4 ,
.Xr kld 4 ,
.Xr pf 4 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr udp 4 ,
.Xr exports 5 ,
.Xr motd 5 ,
.Xr resident.conf 5 ,
.Xr varsym.conf 5 ,
.Xr accton 8 ,
.Xr amd 8 ,
.Xr apm 8 ,
.Xr btconfig 8 ,
.Xr bthcid 8 ,
.Xr cron 8 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr dhclient 8 ,
.Xr dntpd 8 ,
.Xr ftpd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr inetd 8 ,
.Xr jail 8 ,
.Xr lpd 8 ,
.Xr makewhatis 8 ,
.Xr mixer 8 ,
.Xr mountd 8 ,
.Xr moused 8 ,
.Xr mrouted 8 ,
.Xr named 8 ,
.Xr nfsd 8 ,
.Xr pcnfsd 8 ,
.Xr pfctl 8 ,
.Xr pflogd 8 ,
.Xr quotacheck 8 ,
.Xr quotaon 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.sendmail 8 ,
.Xr resident 8 ,
.Xr rndcontrol 8 ,
.Xr route 8 ,
.Xr routed 8 ,
.Xr rpcbind 8 ,
.Xr rpc.lockd 8 ,
.Xr rpc.statd 8 ,
.Xr rtadvd 8 ,
.Xr rtsold 8 ,
.Xr rwhod 8 ,
.Xr savecore 8 ,
.Xr sdpd 8 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sshd 8 ,
.Xr swapon 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr syslogd 8 ,
.Xr sysvipcd 8 ,
.Xr timed 8 ,
.Xr usbd 8 ,
.Xr vinum 8 ,
.Xr yp 8 ,
.Xr ypbind 8 ,
.Xr ypserv 8 ,
.Xr ypset 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file appeared in
.Fx 2.2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jordan K. Hubbard .
