.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $DragonFly: src/share/man/man5/uuids.5,v 1.1 2008/07/27 18:10:23 thomas Exp $
.\"
.Dd July 27, 2008
.Os
.Dt UUIDS 5
.Sh NAME
.Nm uuids
.Nd UUIDs and their symbolic names
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/defaults/uuids
.Nm /etc/uuids
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Nm
file contains a list of UUIDs and their symbolic names.
.Pp
Each line in a
.Nm
file, other than comment lines that begin with a
.Sq # ,
specifies an UUID and its symbolic name.
The first field is the UUID, the second field is the name,
they are separated by tabs or spaces.
An UUID is a 64 bit number formatted this way:
01234567-89ab-cdef-0123-456789abcdef,
i.e. 16 hexadecimal digits, with
.Sq -
after digit no. 8, 12, 16 and 20.
A name is a text string enclosed in
.Sq \&" .
.Sh EXAMPLES
An UUID with name
.Dq test UUID :
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# test uuids(5) file
061ceb5d-5beb-11dd-924c-010e0cd0bad1   "test UUID"
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/defaults/uuids" -compact
.It Pa /etc/defaults/uuids
A list of UUIDs and their symbolic names provided by the OS vendor.
.It Pa /etc/uuids
A list of UUIDs and their symbolic names provided by the
system administrator.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr uuid 3
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Thomas Nikolajsen .
