.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Michael Smith
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/man4.i386/cs.4,v 1.6.2.5 2001/08/17 13:08:45 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd July 20, 1998
.Dt CS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cs
.Nd Crystal Semiconductor CS8900 and CS8920 ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device cs"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for ethernet adapters based on the
.Tn Crystal Semiconductor CS8900
and
.Tn CS8920
NICs.  These devices are used on the
.Tn IBM EtherJet PCMCIA
adapters and in many embedded applications where the high integration, small
size and low cost of the CS89x0 family compensate for their drawbacks.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver will obtain configuration parameters from the card.
Parameters specified in the configuration entry will be
used if present; the card may be soft-configured so these may be any valid
value.
The driver will detect the
.Tn IBM EtherJet
adapters automatically.
.Pp
Memory-mapped and DMA operation are not supported at this time.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "cs%d: full/half duplex negotiation timeout"
The attempt to negotiate duplex settings with the hub timed out.  This may
indicate a cabling problem or a faulty or incompatible hub.
.It "cs%d: failed to enable <media>"
The CS89x0 failed to select the nominated media, either because it is not
present or not operating correctly.
.It "cs%d: No EEPROM, assuming defaults"
The CS89x0 does not have an EEPROM, or the EEPROM is hopelessly damaged.  Operation
will only be successful if the configuration entry lists suitable values for
the adapter.
.It "cs%d: Invalid irq"
The IRQ specified in the configuration entry is not valid for the adapter.
.It "cs%d: Could not allocate memory for NIC"
There is a critical memory shortage.  The adapter will not function.
.It "cs%d: Adapter has no media"
The adapter is not configured for a specific media type.
The media type will have
to be manually set.
.It "This is a %s, but LDN %d is disabled"
The PnP probe code found a recognised adapter, but the adapter is disabled.
.It "failed to read pnp parms"
A PnP adapter was found, but configuration parameters for it could not be read.
.It "failed to pnp card parametars"
The parameters obtained via PnP were not accepted by the driver.  The adapter
may not function.
.El
.Sh CAVEATS
The CS89x0 family of adapters have a very small RAM buffer (4K).  This may
cause problems with extremely high network loads or bursty network traffic.
In particular, NFS operations should be limited to 1k read/write transactions
in order to avoid overruns.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Maxim Bolotin
and
.An Oleg Sharoiko .
This manpage was written by
.An Michael Smith .
