.\" Copyright (c) 1996-1998 Greg Ungerer (gerg@stallion.oz.au).
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Greg Ungerer.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/usr.sbin/stallion/bootcode/stl.4,v 1.8.2.5 2001/12/14 16:41:52 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd December 1, 2012
.Dt STL 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm stl
.Nd "driver for Stallion Technologies multiport serial controllers"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device stl"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the Stallion Technologies EasyIO,
EasyConnection 8/32 and
EasyConnection 8/64-PCI multiport serial boards.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Configuration of the hardware - DIP switches, jumpers, etc - varies
from board to board.
Consult documentation supplied with the board for hardware
configuration details.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/staliomem?" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ttyE?
stl standard callin devices
.It Pa /dev/ttyiE?
stl initial-state callin devices
.It Pa /dev/ttylE?
stl lock-state callin devices
.It Pa /dev/cuaE?
stl standard callout devices
.It Pa /dev/cuaiE?
stl initial-state callout devices
.It Pa /dev/cualE?
stl lock-state callout devices
.It Pa /dev/staliomem?
board control device
.El
.Pp
Note that the port numbers start at 0 for port 0 of board 0.
Each board has 64 port slots allocated for it.
So the second boards ports start at 64 and go through 127.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr stty 1 ,
.Xr termios 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr comcontrol 8 ,
.Xr stlstats 8
.Sh HISTORY
This driver was originally developed by Greg Ungerer (gerg@stallion.com).
.Sh BUGS
Device names use integer suffixes, rather than the 0-9 a-z sequence
that other drivers use.
.Pp
There will be many unused ttyE device names in a system with more than
one card.
