.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 23, 2015
.Dt ACPI_PVPANIC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpi_pvpanic
.Nd Qemu pvpanic Device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device acpi_pvpanic"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
acpi_pvpanic_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the pvpanic device that can be provided
to virtual-machines by the
.Xr qemu 1
virtual machine monitor.
The pvpanic device can be enabled in
.Xr qemu 1
by adding the
.Fl device Ar pvpanic
command line option.
When the
.Nm
driver is used, the virtual machine execution will be stopped when the
kernel signals a panic.
For accessing
.Xr ddb 4
the virtual machine then needs to be resumed manually (e.g. using the
.Dq cont
command in the qemu-monitor console).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr ddb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 4.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Imre Vadasz Aq Mt imre@vdsz.com .
