.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998, 2000
.\" 	Justin T. Gibbs.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/adv.4,v 1.7.4.6 2001/10/01 13:07:22 dd Exp $
.\"
.Dd February 13, 2000
.Dt ADV 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm adv
.Nd Advansys ISA/VL/PCI 8bit SCSI Host adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For one or more ISA or VL cards:
.Cd device isa
.Cd device "adv0 at isa? port ? irq ? drq ?"
.Pp
For one or more PCI cards:
.Cd device pci
.Cd device adv
.Pp
For one or more SCSI busses:
.Cd device scbus0 at adv0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides access to the 8bit
.Tn SCSI
bus connected to the Advanced Systems Products, Inc.
.Tn ASC900 ,
.Tn ASC1000 ,
.Tn ASC1090 ,
.Tn ASC1200 ,
.Tn ASC3030 ,
.Tn ASC3050 ,
and
.Tn ASC3150
host adapter chips.
The following tables list the AdvanSys products using these chips,
their bus attachment type, maximum sync rate, and the maximum number of
commands that can be handled by the adapter concurrently.
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
Connectivity Products:
.Bl -column "ABP510/5150 " "ISA PnP " "Floppy " "MaxSync " "Commands " "Footnotes "
.It Em Adapter Ta Em Bus Ta Em Floppy Ta Em MaxSync Ta Em Commands Ta Em Footnotes
.It ABP510/5150 Ta ISA Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 240 Ta 1
.It ABP5140 Ta ISA PnP Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta "1,3"
.It ABP5142 Ta ISA PnP Ta Yes Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta 4
.It ABP[3]902 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP3905 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP915 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP920 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP3922 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP3925 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP930 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta 5
.It ABP930U Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP930UA Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP960 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.It ABP960U Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 16 Ta ""
.El
.Pp
Footnotes:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
This board has been shipped by HP with the 4020i CD-R drive.
The board has no BIOS so it cannot control a boot device, but
it can control any secondary SCSI device.
.It
This board has been sold by Iomega as a Jaz Jet PCI adapter.
.It
This board has been sold by SIIG as the i540 SpeedMaster.
.It
This board has been sold by SIIG as the i542 SpeedMaster.
.It
This board has been sold by SIIG as the Fast SCSI Pro PCI.
.El
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
Single Channel Products:
.Bl -column "ABP510/5150 " "ISA PnP " "Floppy " "MaxSync " "Commands "
.It Em Adapter Ta Em Bus Ta Em Floppy Ta Em MaxSync Ta Em Commands
.It ABP542 Ta ISA Ta Yes Ta 10MHz Ta 240
.It ABP842 Ta VL Ta Yes Ta 10MHz Ta 240
.It ABP940 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 240
.It ABP[3]940UA Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 240
.It ABP940U Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 240
.It ABP3960UA Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 240
.It ABP970 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 240
.It ABP970U Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 240
.El
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
Multi Channel Products (Commands are per-channel):
.Bl -column "ABP510/5150 " "ISA PnP " "Floppy " "MaxSync " "Commands " "Channels "
.It Em Adapter Ta Em Bus Ta Em Floppy Ta Em MaxSync Ta Em Commands Ta Em Channels
.It ABP852 Ta VL Ta Yes Ta 10MHz Ta 240 Ta 2
.It ABP950 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 240 Ta 2
.It ABP980 Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 10MHz Ta 240 Ta 4
.It ABP980U Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 240 Ta 4
.It ABP[3]980UA Ta PCI Ta \&No Ta 20MHz Ta 16 Ta 4
.El
.Ed
.Pp
For ISA or Vesa Local Bus adapters, one kernel config entry is required
for every card to be attached by the system.  Specific values for the port
address, irq, and drq may be specified.  If wildcard values are used, the
driver will query the device for its current settings and use those.  If
the port address is a wildcard, the driver consults an internal table of
possible port address locations and attaches to the first unattached card
it finds.  The possible port addresses for these card are 0x110, 0x130,
0x150, 0x190, 0x210, 0x230, 0x250, and 0x330.
.Pp
Per target configuration performed in the
.Tn AdvanceWare
menu, which is accessible at boot,
is honored by this driver.
This includes synchronous/asynchronous transfers,
maximum synchronous negotiation rate, disconnection, tagged queueing,
and the host adapter's SCSI ID.
The global setting for the maximum number of tagged transactions allowed
per target is not honored as the CAM SCSI system will automatically determine
the maximum number of tags a device can receive as well as guarantee fair
resource allocation among devices.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr adw 4 ,
.Xr ahc 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was ported by
.An Justin T. Gibbs
from the Linux driver
written by
.An Bob Frey
of Advanced System Products, Inc.
Many thanks to AdvanSys for providing the original driver under a suitable
license for use in
.Fx .
