.\"	$OpenBSD: ahci.4,v 1.7 2008/04/19 01:18:39 djm Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 David Gwynne <dlg@openbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2009-2016 Matthew Dillon <dillon@backplane.com>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The DragonFly Project
.\" by Matthew Dillon <dillon@backplane.com>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 28, 2014
.Dt AHCI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ahci
.Nd Advanced Host Controller Interface for Serial ATA
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ahci"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ahci_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
Note that
.Dx
compiles this driver into the kernel by default, so you normally do not
have to do anything..
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Serial ATA controllers conforming to the
Advanced Host Controller Interface specification.
.Pp
Several AHCI capable controllers also provide a compatibility mode that
causes them to appear as a traditional ATA controller supported by
.Xr nata 4 .
.Pp
Although
.Nm
controllers are actual ATA controllers, the driver emulates SCSI via a
translation layer.
.Sh Special Features
This driver detects chipsets with the FBS capability, indicating FIS-Based
Switching support.
This capability allows I/O to be queued to multiple targets behind a
port-multiplier and will substantially increase performance when
operating on multiple targets at once.
Unfortunately, most AHCI controllers do not implement FBS.  Without it,
concurrent access to multiple targets behind a port-multiplier will
serialize and wind up being quite slow.
.Pp
This driver detects and supports chipsets with the SPM capability,
indicating Port-Multiplier support.
This capability allows you to connect a port-multiplier to the SATA port.
The driver will then probe and attach all targets loaded into the
port-multiplier.
A few provisios... most port-multipliers implode if no drives are loaded
into them, and most port-multipliers also fail to properly follow the
AHCI port-multiplier standards, so YMMV.  The driver will do everything it
can to attach to a port-multiplier if it sees one.
.Sh WARNINGS
eSATA PCIe cards -
There are many consumer PCIe cards which provide on-board AHCI controllers
and internal or external ports.
This driver should work with most of them.
However, we strongly recommend that you avoid purchasing any AHCI PCIe
cards which provide both external eSATA and internal SATA ports and
have jumpers to select between the two.
The jumper header seriously interferes with delicate SATA
communications and can cause instability and I/O errors even at slower
3Gbps speeds.
.Pp
Port-Multipliers -
There are many consumer port multipliers.  Nearly all of them fail to
properly follow the spec.  This driver works hard to attach to whatever
port-mutilplier it sees.  A good rule of thumb to follow is to
always plug something into the first target slot on the PM.
Dual eSATA/USB port-multipliers are very common but tend to have poorly
implemented firmwares.  Still, you might not have a choice, so YMMV.
Issues that can arise: The PM fails to probe, or the driver only sees
one drive, or hot-swap detection fails to operate properly.
.Pp
Port-Multipliers require PM-capable AHCI chipsets.
Most AHCI chipsets are not PM-capable... Intel is particularly bad (for
reasons unknown).  Marvell chipsets tend to either be PM-capable or
implement virtual PM handling on a (single) normal SATA port.  ASMedia
chipsets are usually PM-capable, but the PCIe card might be poorly designed
and generate lots of I/O errors due to electrical noise.
.Pp
The asynchronous attach described below may cause problems detecting your
boot drive quickly enough for the kernel to be able to mount it.
If you use the feature, the boot drive should normally be on the first
AHCI controller and not be behind a port-multiplier.
Only use the feature if you have a lot of controllers (like three or more).
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
The following hints may be set in
.Xr loader.conf 5
to control the
.Nm
driver's behavior.
Note that the hint need only exist, so removing it requires commenting it out.
.Pp
Usually both the
.Xr nata 4
and the
.Nm
drivers are loaded.
The
.Xr nata 4
driver will pick up any ata-like devices which the
.Nm
driver misses.
If the
.Nm
driver is disabled the
.Xr nata 4
driver will typically pick up the
.Nm
devices, albeit under the
.Pa ad
disk name rather than the
.Pa da
disk name.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hint.ahci.disabled=1
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be told to force a lower-speed 1.5Gb link speed
if necessary, and can also be told to refrain from attempting to send
certain higher-level ATA commands to initialize ATA features which
some devices might not properly implement.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hint.ahci.force150=1
hint.ahci.nofeatures=1
.Ed
.Pp
By default, the driver will use MSI if it is supported.
This behavior can be turned off by setting the following tunable:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.ahci.msi.enable=0
.Ed
.Pp
By default, on startup the driver will synchronously wait for all ports
to probe and attach them in order before allowing the kernel boot to
proceed to the next controller.
Even though ports are probed in parallel, this can slow booting down
if your system has multiple AHCI controllers.
You can force a full asynchronous probe by setting the following
tunable.
The kernel will still wait for all controllers to finish before
proceeding to the mountroot, but all ports will probe in parallel
so booting will be a lot faster.
WARNING!  When probing asynchronously /dev/da* assignments for drives can
change from boot to boot, so be sure to only access drives by their
/dev/serno/* path and not by their /dev/da* drive.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Attach everything asynchronously
hw.ahci.synchronous_boot=0
.Ed
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
Link power management can be set with the sysctl
.Va dev.ahci.%d.%d.link_pwr_mgmt
to 0 for `disabled', 1 for `medium', and 2 for `aggressive'.
Link power state can be read with the sysctl
.Va dev.ahci.%d.%d.link_pwr_state .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr nata 4 ,
.Xr nvme 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sili 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 2.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written by
.An David Gwynne Aq Mt dlg@openbsd.org
and
.An Christopher Pascoe Aq Mt pascoe@openbsd.org
for
.Ox .
.Pp
It was ported to
.Dx
by
.An Matt Dillon Aq Mt dillon@apollo.backplane.com ,
who substantially rewrote the driver (honestly, just about from scratch
but having the openbsd code as a reference helped a lot), and
added new features such as hot-plug, FIS-based switching, and port
multiplier support.
