.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2000
.\" 	Justin T. Gibbs.  All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002
.\"	Scott Long.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/ahd.4,v 1.6.2.1 2006/06/05 19:30:28 brueffer Exp $
.\"
.Dd July 7, 2007
.Dt AHD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ahd
.Nd Adaptec PCI/PCI-X Ultra320 SCSI host adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device ahd"
.Pp
To compile in debugging code:
.Cd options AHD_DEBUG
.Cd options AHD_DEBUG_OPTS=<bitmask of options>
.Cd options AHD_REG_PRETTY_PRINT
.Pp
To configure one or more controllers to assume the target role:
.Cd options AHD_TMODE_ENABLE=<bitmask of units>
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ahd_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides access to the
.Tn SCSI
bus(es) connected to Adaptec
.Tn AIC79xx
host adapter chips.
.Pp
Driver features include support for narrow and wide busses,
fast, ultra, ultra2, ultra160, and ultra320 synchronous transfers,
packetized transfers, tagged queueing, 512 SCB's, and target mode.
.Pp
The
.Dv AHD_DEBUG_OPTS
option is used to control which diagnostic messages are printed to the
console when
.Dv AHD_DEBUG
is enabled.
Logically OR the following bits together:
.Bl -column -offset indent ".Em Value" ".Em Function"
.It Em Value Ta Em Function
.It 0x00001 Ta Show miscellaneous information
.It 0x00002 Ta Show sense data
.\"0x00004 XXX: AHD_SHOW_RECOVERY
.It 0x00008 Ta Show Serial EEPROM contents
.It 0x00010 Ta Show bus termination settings
.It 0x00020 Ta Show host memory usage
.It 0x00040 Ta Show SCSI protocol messages
.It 0x00080 Ta Show mode pointer of the chip register window
.It 0x00100 Ta Show selection timeouts
.It 0x00200 Ta Show FIFO usage messages
.It 0x00400 Ta Show Queue Full status
.\"0x00800 XXX: AHD_SHOW_DV
.\"0x01000 XXX: AHD_SHOW_MASKED_ERRORS
.It 0x02000 Ta Show SCB queue status
.It 0x04000 Ta Show inbound packet information
.It 0x08000 Ta Show S/G list information
.\"0x10000 XXX: AHD_SHOW_INT_COALESCING
.It 0x20000 Ta Enable extra diagnostic code in the firmware
.El
.Pp
The
.Dv AHD_REG_PRETTY_PRINT
option compiles in support for human-readable bit definitions for each register
that is printed by the debugging code.
However, it also bloats the compiled
size of the driver by approximately 215KB.
.Pp
Individual controllers may be configured to operate in the target role
through the
.Dv AHD_TMODE_ENABLE
configuration option.
The value assigned to this option should be a bitmap
of all units where target mode is desired.
For example, a value of 0x25 would enable target mode on units 0, 2, and 5.
Note that target mode is only supported for ultra160 speeds and below.
.Pp
Per target configuration performed in the
.Tn SCSI-Select
menu, accessible at boot,
is honored by this driver.
This includes synchronous/asynchronous transfers,
maximum synchronous negotiation rate,
wide transfers,
disconnection,
and the host adapter's
.Tn SCSI
ID.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Adaptec
.Tn AIC7901
host adapter chip
.It
Adaptec
.Tn AIC7901A
host adapter chip
.It
Adaptec
.Tn AIC7902
host adapter chip
.It
Adaptec
.Tn 29320
host adapter
.It
Adaptec
.Tn 39320
host adapter
.It
Many motherboards with on-board
.Tn SCSI
support
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ahc 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver, the
.Tn AIC7xxx
sequencer-code assembler,
and the firmware running on the aic79xx chips were written by
.An Justin T. Gibbs .
This manual page is based on the
.Xr ahc 4
manual page.
.Sh BUGS
The current generation of 79xx chips do not support target mode in Ultra320
mode.
Target mode in general has not been well tested in this driver.
