.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Abdelkader Boudih <dragonflybsd@seuros.com>
.\"
.Dd June 22, 2026
.Dt APPLE_IR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm apple_ir
.Nd Apple IR receiver driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device apple_ir"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
apple_ir_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Apple IR receivers found in Mac computers
(2006\(en2011 era).
It supports both Apple Remote controls and generic IR remotes using the
NEC infrared protocol.
.Pp
The driver attaches to the USB HID interface of the receiver and
delivers key events through an
evdev input device at
.Pa /dev/input/eventX .
.Pp
The Apple Remote uses a proprietary 5-byte protocol.
Button presses generate key-down reports; the hardware does not send
key-up events, so the driver synthesizes them via a 125ms timer.
Some buttons (Enter, Play/Pause via the middle button) use a two-packet
sequence where the first packet sets a flag and the second completes
the command.
.Pp
Generic IR remotes using the NEC protocol are also supported.
The driver validates the NEC checksum
.Pq code + ~code = 0xFF
and maps known codes to evdev key events.
.Ss Apple Remote Keymap
.Bl -column "play/pause" "KEY_PLAYPAUSE" -offset indent
.It Sy Button Ta Sy evdev Code
.It menu Ta KEY_MENU
.It play/pause Ta KEY_PLAYPAUSE
.It >> Ta KEY_FORWARD
.It << Ta KEY_BACK
.It + Ta KEY_VOLUMEUP
.It \- Ta KEY_VOLUMEDOWN
.It center Ta KEY_ENTER
.El
.Ss Generic IR (NEC) Keymap
.Bl -column "Code" "KEY_CHANNELDOWN" -offset indent
.It Sy Code Ta Sy evdev Code
.It 0xe1 Ta KEY_VOLUMEUP
.It 0xe9 Ta KEY_VOLUMEDOWN
.It 0xed Ta KEY_CHANNELUP
.It 0xf3 Ta KEY_CHANNELDOWN
.It 0xf5 Ta KEY_PLAYPAUSE
.It 0xf9 Ta KEY_POWER
.It 0xfb Ta KEY_MUTE
.It 0xfe Ta KEY_OK
.El
.Pp
A low-battery condition is reported once per attach as a kernel message.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Apple IR receivers with USB vendor ID 0x05ac and the
following product IDs:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "0x8242" -compact
.It 0x8240
Apple IR Receiver (first generation)
.It 0x8241
Apple IR Receiver
.It 0x8242
Apple IR Receiver (Mac Mini 2011, MacBook Pro 3,1)
.It 0x8243
Apple IR Receiver
.It 0x1440
Apple IR Receiver (slim)
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/input/eventX" -compact
.It Pa /dev/input/eventX
evdev input device node
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apple_smc 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 6.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Abdelkader Boudih Aq Mt dragonflybsd@seuros.com .
.Pp
The Apple Remote protocol was reverse-engineered by James McKenzie
and others.
