.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Abdelkader Boudih <dragonflybsd@seuros.com>
.\"
.Dd July 3, 2026
.Dt APPLE_SMC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm apple_smc
.Nd Apple System Management Controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device apple_smc"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
apple_smc_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the System Management Controller (SMC) found
in Apple Macintosh computers.
The SMC manages fans, temperature sensors, keyboard backlight,
ambient light sensors, the Sudden Motion Sensor (SMS), and various
system state keys.
.Pp
The driver supports two hardware backends:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
ISA I/O port (port 0x300) on Intel Macs through iMac13,x.
.It
MMIO register window on newer Intel Macs (iMac14,x and later),
including those with an Apple T2 security chip.
.El
.Pp
The MMIO backend is probed first.
If a memory-mapped BAR is present and responds, the driver uses MMIO;
otherwise it falls back to ISA port I/O.
T2 Macs are identified by an
.Va RGEN
key value of 3.
.Pp
All sensor values and controls are exposed through the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface under
.Va dev.apple_smc.0 .
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
.Ss Fan Controls
Each fan is exposed under
.Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>
where
.Aq N
is the fan number starting from 0.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>.id
.Pq read-only
Fan model identification string.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>.speed
.Pq read-only
Current fan speed in RPM.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>.safespeed
.Pq read-only
Fan safe speed in RPM.
Only present if the hardware reports a safe speed key.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>.minspeed
Minimum fan speed in RPM.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>.maxspeed
Maximum fan speed in RPM.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>.targetspeed
Target fan speed in RPM.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.fan.<N>.manual
Fan manual mode.
Set to 1 to disable automatic fan control, 0 to re-enable it.
On T2 Macs this uses the per-fan
.Va F<N>Md
key; on older Macs it uses the global
.Va FS!\&
bitmask.
.El
.Ss Temperature Sensors
Temperature sensors are auto-detected at attach time by scanning the
SMC key namespace for keys in the
.Ql T
range with
.Va sp78
type (signed 8.8 fixed-point, millidegrees Celsius).
.Pp
Sensors whose probe read returns a value below \-10000 millidegrees
are classified as Intel DTS (distance-to-Tj,max) sensors and placed
under a separate
.Va dts
subtree.
The sysctl handler converts DTS readings to absolute temperature using
the Tj,max value read from MSR 0x1A2 at attach time.
Sensors returning \-120000 or below are treated as disconnected and
are not registered.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.temp.<KEY>
.Pq read-only
Absolute temperature in millidegrees Celsius.
.Aq KEY
is the 4-character SMC key name, e.g.\&
.Ql TC0D
for CPU die temperature.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.temp.dts.<KEY>
.Pq read-only
DTS sensor converted to absolute temperature.
.El
.Ss Voltage, Current, and Power Sensors
Voltage, current, and power sensors are auto-detected by scanning the
.Ql V ,
.Ql I ,
and
.Ql P
key ranges respectively.
Values are reported in millivolts, milliamps, or milliwatts.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.voltage.<KEY>
.Pq read-only
Voltage in millivolts.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.current.<KEY>
.Pq read-only
Current in milliamps.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.power.<KEY>
.Pq read-only
Power in milliwatts.
.El
.Ss Ambient Light Sensors
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.ambient.<KEY>
.Pq read-only
Ambient light sensor reading.
Keys are typically
.Ql ALV0 ,
.Ql ALV1 ,
etc.
.El
.Ss Keyboard Backlight
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.light.left
.Pq read-only
Left ambient light sensor value used for keyboard backlight.
On newer models with 10-byte payloads, a dedicated decoder is used.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.light.right
.Pq read-only
Right ambient light sensor value.
Only present on models with a separate right sensor and 6-byte payloads.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.light.control
Keyboard backlight brightness, 0 (off) to 255 (maximum).
The value is cached and restored on resume from suspend.
.El
.Ss Sudden Motion Sensor (SMS)
The SMS provides three-axis accelerometer data.
It is only present on MacBook and MacBook Pro models with
a built-in hard disk motion sensor.
.Pp
SMS events are delivered to
.Xr devd 8
with system
.Ql ACPI ,
subsystem
.Ql apple_smc ,
and type
.Ql SMS .
The notify value encodes the event type:
0 = shock, 1 = high acceleration, 2 = free fall.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.sms.x
.Pq read-only
Accelerometer X axis value.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.sms.y
.Pq read-only
Accelerometer Y axis value.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.sms.z
.Pq read-only
Accelerometer Z axis value.
.El
.Ss System State
These sysctls are only present if the corresponding SMC key exists
on the hardware.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.shutdown_cause
.Pq read-only
Last shutdown cause as reported by the
.Va MSSD
key, decoded to a human-readable string where known
.Pq e.g.\& Dq 5 (good-shutdown) .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.sleep_cause
.Pq read-only
Last sleep cause
.Pq Va MSSP .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.thermal_status
.Pq read-only
Thermal subsystem alert flags
.Pq Va MSAL .
Decoded bits include TSS, thermal validity, calibration validity,
PROCHOT assertion, and power limits.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.time_of_day
.Pq read-only
SMC clock: seconds since midnight
.Pq Va CLKT .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.wake_time
Scheduled wake time: seconds since midnight, 0 to disable
.Pq Va CLWK .
On write, the driver verifies the value stuck by reading it back;
if the SMC uses little-endian encoding on a particular model,
a LE retry is attempted automatically.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.power_state
.Pq read-only
SMC power state index
.Pq Va MSPS .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.board_id
.Pq read-only
Apple board codename, e.g.\&
.Ql Mac-27ADBB7B4CEE8E61
.Pq Va RPlt .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.chip_gen
.Pq read-only
Apple chip generation; a value of 3 indicates a T2 coprocessor
.Pq Va RGEN .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.prochot_override
Only present when the driver overrode a PROCHOT# assertion at
attach time.
Set to 1 to keep BD_PROCHOT cleared (CPU ignores external PROCHOT#),
0 to restore it and return fans to SMC automatic control.
See
.Sx PROCHOT OVERRIDE
below.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.g3_poweron_time
Scheduled power-on from S5 (mechanical-off) as a Unix timestamp;
0 disables the timer
.Pq Va G3AO .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.g3_watchdog
G3 watchdog flag paired with
.Va g3_poweron_time
.Pq Va G3WD .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.ac_wake_timer
Delay in seconds before auto power-on after AC reconnect
.Pq Va AUWT .
Only effective when
.Va always_up
is enabled.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.display_brightness_raw
.Pq read-only
Raw display brightness value from the SMC
.Pq Va DPBR .
Returns 0xffff on machines without an internal display.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.chassis_state
.Pq read-only
Chassis/environment state byte
.Pq Va ENV0 .
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.sw_thermal_throttle_disable
Software thermal throttle disable flag
.Pq Va STFD .
Set to 1 to disable SMC software thermal throttling.
.El
.Ss Battery Charge Limit (T2 only)
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.battery_charge_limit
Battery charge limit percentage, 0 to 100
.Pq Va BCLM .
Only present on T2 Macs.
.El
.Ss Always-Up
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.always_up
Prevent the machine from staying powered off.
The machine will automatically power on after any shutdown.
Set to 1 to enable, 0 to disable
.Pq Va AUPO .
.El
.Ss Thermal Governor
When the driver overrides PROCHOT and takes fans into manual mode
(see
.Sx PROCHOT OVERRIDE ) ,
a thermal governor kernel thread is started to manage fan speeds
based on CPU temperature.
The governor is only active when fans are under manual override.
.Pp
The governor implements a linear fan curve between configurable
low and high temperature thresholds.
Below
.Va temp_low ,
fans run at their minimum speed.
Above
.Va temp_high ,
fans run at their maximum speed.
A hysteresis deadband prevents oscillation near the thresholds.
Fan ramp-down is rate-limited to 200 RPM per governor tick to
avoid abrupt speed changes, while ramp-up is immediate.
.Pp
An emergency threshold forces all fans to maximum speed regardless
of the fan curve.
If a temperature sensor read fails, the governor assumes the
worst case and sets fans to maximum (fail-hot).
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.enabled
Enable (1) or disable (0) the thermal governor.
Disabling it sets all override fans to maximum speed for safety.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.interval
Poll interval in seconds (default: 5).
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.temp_low
Temperature in millidegrees Celsius below which fans run at
minimum speed (default: 55000, i.e.\& 55\(deC).
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.temp_high
Temperature in millidegrees Celsius above which fans run at
maximum speed (default: 80000, i.e.\& 80\(deC).
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.hysteresis
Hysteresis deadband in millidegrees Celsius to prevent fan speed
oscillation (default: 3000, i.e.\& 3\(deC).
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.emergency
Emergency temperature in millidegrees Celsius; if any sensor
exceeds this, all fans are forced to maximum
(default: 90000, i.e.\& 90\(deC).
.El
.Ss Raw Key Access
A raw SMC key access interface is available under
.Va dev.apple_smc.0.raw
for diagnostics and exploration of undocumented keys.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.raw.key
Write a 4-character SMC key name to select it.
The key's value, length, and type are read automatically.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.raw.value
Read or write the selected key's value as a hexadecimal string.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.raw.len
.Pq read-only
Length of the selected key's value in bytes.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.raw.type
.Pq read-only
4-character type code of the selected key.
.It Va dev.apple_smc.0.raw.index
Write a numeric key index (0 to nkeys\-1) to look up the key at
that position in the SMC key table.
Sets the raw key, value, length, and type fields accordingly.
.El
.Sh PROCHOT OVERRIDE
The SMC may assert the external PROCHOT# signal when temperature
sensors report disconnect sentinel values, or when the battery is
absent.
This throttles the CPU to its minimum frequency even though no
real thermal event has occurred.
.Pp
At attach time, the driver checks the
.Va SPHT
key for an active PROCHOT# assertion.
If a known benign cause is found (disconnected LCD sensors or
absent/dead battery), the driver clears BD_PROCHOT (bit 0) in
MSR 0x1FC
.Pq IA32_POWER_CTL
so the CPU ignores the external throttle signal.
All other thermal protections (TCC, thermal monitor) remain active.
.Pp
When PROCHOT is overridden, the driver also takes fans running at
or above 90% of maximum (SMC failsafe) into manual mode.
The
.Va FS!\&
bitmask is read-modify-written to preserve internal SMC flag bits.
The thermal governor reasserts manual mode on every poll tick,
as the SMC periodically reclaims automatic control.
.Pp
On S3 resume the driver re-applies the override (the MSR resets)
and reasserts fan manual mode.
.Pp
The override can be toggled at runtime via
.Va dev.apple_smc.0.system.prochot_override .
Setting it to 0 restores BD_PROCHOT, sets fans to maximum,
releases manual mode, and stops the thermal governor.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports any Intel Mac with ACPI device
.Ql APP0001 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
Read the CPU die temperature:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.temp.TC0D
.Ed
.Pp
Set fan 0 to manual mode at 2000 RPM:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.fan.0.manual=1
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.fan.0.targetspeed=2000
.Ed
.Pp
Check the last shutdown cause:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.system.shutdown_cause
.Ed
.Pp
Limit battery charge to 80% on a T2 Mac:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.battery_charge_limit=80
.Ed
.Pp
Schedule a power-on from S5 in one hour:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.system.g3_poweron_time=$(date -v+1H +%s)
.Ed
.Pp
Adjust the thermal governor temperature range:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.temp_low=50000
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.temp_high=75000
.Ed
.Pp
Look up SMC key by index:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.raw.index=42
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.raw.key
sysctl dev.apple_smc.0.raw.value
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr apple_fw 4 ,
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 6.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Abdelkader Boudih Aq Mt dragonflybsd@seuros.com .
.Sh CAVEATS
The thermal governor is only started when a PROCHOT override is active
and fans are detected in SMC failsafe mode.
On machines where PROCHOT is not asserted, fans remain under full
SMC automatic control.
.Pp
The
.Va CLWK
key encoding (big-endian vs little-endian) varies by model.
The driver attempts BE first and falls back to LE if the readback
does not match.
.Pp
Disabling the thermal governor via
.Va dev.apple_smc.0.thermal.enabled
sets all override fans to maximum speed as a safety measure.
