.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Broadcom Corporation
.\"  David Christensen <davidch@broadcom.com>.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Broadcom Corporation nor the name of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written consent.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS'
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/bce.4,v 1.7 2007/02/09 18:26:13 brueffer Exp $
.\"
.Dd May 30, 2013
.Dt BCE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bce
.Nd "Broadcom NetXtreme II PCIe Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device bce"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_bce_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports Broadcom's NetXtreme II product family, including the
BCM5706, BCM5708, BCM5709 and BCM5716 Ethernet controllers.
.Pp
The NetXtreme II product family is composed of various Converged NIC (or CNIC)
Ethernet controllers which support a TCP Offload Engine (TOE), Remote DMA (RDMA),
and iSCSI acceleration, in addition to standard L2 Ethernet traffic, all on the
same controller.
The following features are supported in the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.\"IP/TCP/UDP checksum offload
TCP/UDP checksum offload
.\".It
.\"Jumbo frames (up to 9022 bytes)
.It
TCP segmentation offloading (TSO)
.It
VLAN tag stripping and inserting
.It
Interrupt coalescing
.It
10/100/1000Mbps operation in full-duplex mode
.It
10/100Mbps operation in half-duplex mode
.El
.Pp
The following features are supported in the
.Nm
driver for BCM5709 and BCM5716:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
Receive side scaling (RSS), up to 8 reception queues
.It
Multiple tranmission queues, up to 8 transmission queues
.It
Multiple vector MSI-X
.El
.Pp
For BCM5709 and BCM5716,
by default, the
.Nm
driver will try enabling as many reception and transmission queues
as are allowed by the number of CPUs in the system.
If multiple transmission queues are enabled,
the round-robin arbitration is performed among the transmission queues.
It should be noted that
if both TSO and multiple transmission queues are enabled,
the round-robin arbitration between transmission queues is done
at the TSO packet boundary.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Set 1000baseT operation over twisted pair.
Only
.Cm full-duplex
mode is supported.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
The
.Nm
driver supports
.Xr polling 4 .
.Sh TUNABLES
.Em X
is the device unit number.
.Bl -tag -width ".Va hw.bceX.npoll.offset"
.It Va hw.bce.tx_bds
Maximum number of sending BDs which must be processed by the device
before the device updates the status block and generates interrupt.
It is used together with
.Va hw.bce.tx_ticks
to achieve TX interrupt moderation.
Default value is 255.
.It Va hw.bce.tx_bds_int
Maximum number of sending BDs which must be processed by the device
before the device updates the status block
during host interrupt processing.
Default value is 255.
.It Va hw.bce.tx_ticks
How often status block should be updated and interrupt should be generated
by the device,
due to sending packets.
It is used together with
.Va hw.bce.tx_bds
to achieve TX interrupt moderation.
Default value is 1022 (microseconds).
.It Va hw.bce.tx_ticks_int
How often status block should be updated by the device
during host interrupt processing,
due to sending packets.
Default value is 1022 (microseconds).
.It Va hw.bce.rx_bds
Maximum number of BDs which must be received by the device
before the device updates the status block and generates interrupt.
It is used together with
.Va hw.bce.rx_ticks
to achieve RX interrupt moderation.
Default value is 0.
.It Va hw.bce.rx_bds_int
Maximum number of BDs which must be received by the device
before the device updates the status block
during host interrupt processing.
Default value is 128.
.It Va hw.bce.rx_ticks
How often status block should be updated and interrupt should be generated
by the device,
due to receiving packets.
It is used together with
.Va hw.bce.rx_bds
to achieve RX interrupt moderation.
Default value is 150 (microseconds).
.It Va hw.bce.rx_ticks_int
How often status block should be updated by the device
during host interrupt processing,
due to receiving packets.
Default value is 150 (microseconds).
.It Va hw.bce.msi.enable Va hw.bceX.msi.enable
For BCM5706 and BCM5708,
by default,
the driver will use MSI if it is supported.
This behavior can be turned off by setting this tunable to 0.
.It Va hw.bceX.msi.cpu
If MSI is used, it specifies the MSI's target CPU.
.It Va hw.bce.msix.enable Va hw.bceX.msix.enable
For BCM5709 and BCM5716,
by default,
the driver will use MSI-X if it is supported.
This behavior can be turned off by setting this tunable to 0.
.It Va hw.bce.rx_pages Va hw.bceX.rx_pages
How many reception descriptor pages should be used.
One reception descriptor page holds 256 reception descriptors.
Default value is 2.
.It Va hw.bce.tx_pages Va hw.bceX.tx_pages
How many transmission descriptor pages should be used.
One transmission descriptor page holds 256 transmission descriptors.
Default value is 2.
.It Va hw.bceX.msix.offset
For BCM5709 and BCM5716,
if MSI-X is used,
this tunable specifies the leading target CPU for transmission and reception
queues processing.
The value specificed must be aligned to the number of reception queues
enabled and must be less than the power of 2 number of CPUs.
.It Va hw.bceX.npoll.offset
This tunable specifies the leading target CPU for transmission and reception
queues
.Xr polling 4
processing.
The value specificed must be aligned to the number of reception queues
enabled and must be less than the power of 2 number of CPUs.
.It Va hw.bce.rx_rings Va hw.bceX.rx_rings
For BCM5709 and BCM5716,
if MSI-X is used,
this tunable specifies the number of reception queues to be enabled.
Maximum allowed value for these tunables is 8 and
it must be power of 2 aligned.
Setting these tunables to 0 allows the driver to enable as many reception queues
as allowed by the number of CPUs.
.It Va hw.bce.tx_rings Va hw.bceX.tx_rings
For BCM5709 and BCM5716,
if MSI-X is used,
this tunable specifies the number of transmission queues to be enabled.
Maximum allowed value for these tunables is 8,
it must be power of 2 aligned
and it must be less than or equal to the number of reception queues enabled.
Setting these tunables to 0 allows the driver to enable as many transmission queues
as allowed by the number of CPUs and number reception queues enabled.
.It Va hw.bce.tx_wreg
The number of transmission descriptors should be setup before the hardware
register is written.
Setting this value too high will have negative effect
on transmission timeliness.
Setting this value too low will hurt overall transmission due to the frequent
hardware register writing.
Default value is 8.
.El
.Sh MIB Variables
A number of per-interface variables are implemented in the
.Va hw.bce Ns Em X
branch of the
.Xr sysctl 3
MIB.
.Bl -tag -width "tx_ticks_int"
.It Va tx_bds_int
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.tx_bds_int .
.It Va tx_bds
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.tx_bds .
.It Va tx_ticks_int
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.tx_ticks_int .
.It Va tx_ticks
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.tx_ticks .
.It Va rx_bds_int
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.rx_bds_int .
.It Va rx_bds
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce_rx_bds .
.It Va rx_ticks_int
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.rx_ticks_int .
.It Va rx_ticks
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.rx_ticks .
.It Va rx_rings
Number of reception queues actually enabled (read-only).
For BCM5709 and BCM5716,
if MSI-X is enabled,
the enabled reception queues will be one more than the
value specified in the tunable
.Va hw.bce.rx_rings
or
.Va hw.bceX.rx_rings .
The extra reception queue is for the packets whose RSS hash
could not be calculated by the hardware.
.It Va tx_rings
Number of transmission queues enable (read-only).
For BCM5709 and BCM5716,
if MSI-X is enabled,
use the tunable
.Va hw.bce.tx_rings
or
.Va hw.bceX.tx_rings
to configure it.
.It Va rx_pages
Number of reception descriptor pages enabled (read-only).
Use the tunable
.Va hw.bce.rx_pages
or
.Va hw.bceX.rx_pages
to configure it.
.It Va tx_pages
Number of transmission descriptor pages enabled (read-only).
Use the tunable
.Va hw.bce.tx_pages
or
.Va hw.bceX.tx_pages
to configure it.
.It Va tx_wreg
See the tunable
.Va hw.bce.tx_wreg .
.It Va npoll_offset
.Xr polling 4
reception and transmission queues' leading target CPU.
It has the same constraints as the tunable
.Va hw.bceX.npoll.offset .
The set value will take effect the next time
.Xr polling 4
is enabled on the device.
.It Va stat_*
Various hardware statistics.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An David Christensen Aq Mt davidch@broadcom.com .
.An Sepherosa Ziehau
added receive side scaling,
multiple transmission queues
and multiple vector MSI-X support to
.Dx .
