.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Imre Vadász
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 24, 2026
.Dt CORECSTAT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm corecstat
.Nd device driver for Intel Core C-State and Package C-State residency counters.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device corecstat"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
corecstat_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Intel's Core C-State and Package C-State residency
counters, that are provided in Nehalem and newer Core and Xeon CPUs,
as well as in Atom CPUs of the Silvermont and newer architectures.
Core C-State residency is shown for each physical CPU core, and
Package C-State residency is shown per CPU package.
The values are exposed through the
.Dv HW_SENSORS
.Xr sysctl 3
tree.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% sysctl hw.sensors
hw.sensors.cpu2.percent0: 0.00% (node0 core0 C3 res.)
hw.sensors.cpu2.percent1: 0.00% (node0 core0 C6 res.)
hw.sensors.cpu2.percent2: 99.42% (node0 core0 C7 res.)
hw.sensors.cpu3.percent0: 0.00% (node0 core1 C3 res.)
hw.sensors.cpu3.percent1: 0.00% (node0 core1 C6 res.)
hw.sensors.cpu3.percent2: 99.62% (node0 core1 C7 res.)
hw.sensors.cpu_node0.percent0: 14.33% (node0 PC2 residency)
hw.sensors.cpu_node0.percent1: 0.03% (node0 PC3 residency)
hw.sensors.cpu_node0.percent2: 0.00% (node0 PC6 residency)
hw.sensors.cpu_node0.percent3: 85.18% (node0 PC7 residency)
hw.sensors.cpu_node0.percent4: 0.00% (node0 PC8 residency)
hw.sensors.cpu_node0.percent5: 0.00% (node0 PC9 residency)
hw.sensors.cpu_node0.percent6: 0.00% (node0 PC10 residency)
.Ed
.Pp
These numbers are useful to understand how much, and to what extent CPU
powersaving is being used. Higher numbers designate a "deeper" powersaving
state, which will use less electricity. However "deeper" powersaving states
will also include a slower wakeup time, which can sometimes degrade
interactive performance under partial system load.
You can modify the C-State powersaving behavior on these Intel CPUs by
adjusting the
.Va machdep.mwait.CX
sysctl knobs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr sysctl 3 ,
.Xr coretemp 4 ,
.Xr corepower 4 ,
.Xr devctl 4 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 6.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Imre Vadász Aq Mt imre@vdsz.com .
