.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The DragonFly BSD Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The DragonFly BSD Project
.\" by Tomohiro Kusumi <kusumi.tomohiro@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd October 11, 2015
.Dt DM_TARGET_DELAY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dm_target_delay
.Nd Device-mapper delay target
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device dm"
.Cd "device dm_target_delay"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dm_target_delay_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
target for
.Xr dm 4
provides I/O delay for read or both read and write, and maps them to
specified devices, compatible with Linux dm-delay.
.Dq Nm dmsetup Cm create
takes the following list of parameters for the
.Nm
table.
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "<read_device> <read_offset> <read_delay> [<write_device> <write_offset> <write_delay>]"
.Ed
.Pp
Parameters for write delay are optional.
If write parameters are not specified, read parameters are used for write.
In order to only delay read, explicitly specify 0 delay for write.
.Pp
Offsets are specified in 512 bytes sectors.
Delays are specified in milliseconds.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dm 4 ,
.Xr dmsetup 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
.Xr dm 4
target first appeared in
.Dx 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Tomohiro Kusumi
