.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The DragonFly BSD Project.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The DragonFly BSD Project
.\" by Tomohiro Kusumi <kusumi.tomohiro@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd November 17, 2015
.Dt DM_TARGET_FLAKEY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dm_target_flakey
.Nd Device-mapper flakey target
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device dm"
.Cd "device dm_target_flakey"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dm_target_flakey_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
target for
.Xr dm 4
provides periodic unreliable I/O behavior to simulate failing devices for testing purposes.
.Dq Nm dmsetup Cm create
takes the following list of parameters for the
.Nm
table.
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "<device_path> <offset> <up_interval> <down_interval> [<num_feature_parameters> [<feature_parameters>]]"
.Ed
.Pp
The first four parameters are mandatory.
.Nm
is similar to
.Xr dm_target_linear 4
except that
.Nm
has parameters for periodic unreliable I/O behavior.
.Pp
<device_path> is a path to the underlying device.
<offset> is the starting sector within the device.
<up_interval> is the number of seconds device is available.
<down_interval> is the number of seconds device returns errors.
The device has periodic unreliable I/O behavior for <down_interval>
seconds every other <up_interval> seconds starting from the time
the table is loaded by
.Xr dmsetup 8 .
.Pp
Optional <feature_parameters> are as follows.
<num_feature_parameters> takes the number of parameters for <feature_parameters>.
In other words <num_feature_parameters> is the number of parameters after this.
If <feature_parameters> are not specified, all I/Os return error during <down_interval>.
.Pp
.Dq Nm drop_writes
feature takes no additional parameters.
All write I/Os are silently ignored.
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "[drop_writes]"
.Ed
.Pp
.Dq Nm corrupt_bio_byte
feature takes four additional mandatory parameters.
It replaces <Nth_byte> of the
.Dq Nm struct Cm buf
data
whose direction is <direction> with <value> during <down_interval>.
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "[corrupt_bio_byte <Nth_byte> <direction> <value> <flags>]"
.Ed
.Pp
<Nth_byte> is the offset of the
.Dq Nm struct Cm buf
data to replace. Counting starts at 1 to replace the first byte of the data.
<direction> is either 'r' for reads or 'w' for writes. Using 'w' is imcompatible with
.Dq Nm drop_writes
feature.
<value> is the value to replace which must be between 0 and 255.
<flags> makes
.Nm
perform the replacement only if
.Dq Nm b_flags
field of
.Dq Nm struct Cm buf
has all the specified flags set.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dm 4 ,
.Xr dmsetup 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
.Xr dm 4
target first appeared in
.Dx 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Tomohiro Kusumi
