.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 24, 2015
.Dt ECC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ecc
.Nd ECC memory controller support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device dimm"
.Cd "device coremctl"
.Cd "device ecc"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ecc_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
provides support for ECC memory controllers.
If ECC support is enabled in the BIOS,
the number of ECC errors is exposed through
.Dv HW_SENSORS
.Xr sysctl
tree.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% sysctl hw.sensors
hw.sensors.dimm0.ecc0: 0 (node0 chan0 DIMM0 ecc), OK
hw.sensors.dimm1.ecc0: 0 (node0 chan1 DIMM0 ecc), OK
.Ed
.Pp
The DIMM location and configurable threshold of ECC errors
is exposed through hw.dimminfo
.Xr sysctl 3
tree.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% sysctl hw.dimminfo
hw.dimminfo.dimm0.node: 0
hw.dimminfo.dimm0.chan: 0
hw.dimminfo.dimm0.slot: 0
hw.dimminfo.dimm0.ecc_thresh: 10
hw.dimminfo.dimm1.node: 0
hw.dimminfo.dimm1.chan: 1
hw.dimminfo.dimm1.slot: 0
hw.dimminfo.dimm1.ecc_thresh: 10
.Ed
.Pp
If the number of ECC errors goes above the configured threshold
(ecc_thresh),
a notify event will be sent using
.Xr devctl 4 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following memory controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
AMD 8000 memory controller
.It
AMD 8151 memory controller
.It
Intel E3 memory controller
.It
Intel E3 v2 memory controller
.It
Intel E3 v3 memory controller
.\".It
.\"Intel X3400 memory controller
.It
Intel E5 v2 memory controller
.It
Intel E5 v3 memory controller
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr sysctl 3 ,
.Xr devctl 4 ,
.Xr devd 8 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Dx 1.7 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Matthew Dillon .
