.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, 2005
.\"	Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, 2005
.\"	Andrew Atrens <atrens@nortelnetworks.com>.
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice unmodified, this list of conditions, and the following
.\"    disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $DragonFly: src/share/man/man4/iwi.4,v 1.5 2006/03/21 03:01:49 swildner Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 1, 2005
.Os
.Dt IWI 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm iwi
.Nd Intel(R) PRO/Wireless 2200BG/2915ABG IEEE 802.11 driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device iwi"
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Intel(R) PRO/Wireless 2200BG and 2915ABG MiniPCI
network adapters.
.Pp
By default, the
.Nm
driver configures the adapter for BSS operation (aka infrastructure mode).
This mode requires the use of an access point.
.Pp
In addition IBSS operation (aka adhoc mode) is also supported. This mode requires
special ibss firmware. See
.Xr iwicontrol 8
for more details on how to load firmware.
.Pp
For more (general) information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (ie: connect to an access point):
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64 bits WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
        wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 128bits WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
        wepmode on wepkey 0x01020304050607080910111213
.Ed
.Pp
To join or create an IBSS network, use something like:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig iwi0 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
        mediaopt adhoc
.Ed
.Pp
To debug a network setup, you may wish to enable interface debugging:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig iwi0 down debug up
.Ed
.Pp
To disable debugging, you may simply use:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig iwi0 down -debug up
.Ed
.Sh WORTH NOTING
It's worth noting that in BSS mode if you haven't specified an
ssid, the driver will auto-assign an ssid, joining the best
network available.
.Pp
In IBSS mode you must specify an ssid for the driver to join a network.
If no network exists with the ssid name you have chosen the driver will
auto-create a standalone IBSS network that others may later join. This
behaviour is on by default, and may be controlled by -
.Bd -literal -offset indent
wicontrol iwi0 -c 0     Disables network auto-create behaviour.
.Ed
.Bd -literal -offset indent
wicontrol iwi0 -c 1     Enables network auto-create behaviour.
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "iwi%d: firmware reset"
The driver has reset the firmware. This shouldn't but may occasionally happen.
.It "iwi%d: device timeout"
The driver will reset the hardware. This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr an 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wi 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr iwicontrol 8 ,
.Xr wicontrol 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this man page were derived from those written by
.An Damien Bergamini Aq damien.bergamini@free.fr .
.Pp
.Dx
enhancements and IBSS support were written by
.An Andrew Atrens Aq atrens@nortel.com .
