.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2006
.\"	Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice unmodified, this list of conditions, and the following
.\"    disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: head/share/man/man4/iwm.4 286441 2015-08-08 06:06:48Z rpaulo $
.\"
.Dd October 29, 2016
.Dt IWM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iwm
.Nd Intel IEEE 802.11ac wireless network driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
include the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iwm"
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device wlan"
.\".Cd "device firmware"
.Ed
.Pp
You also need to select a firmware for your device.
.\"Choose one from:
.\".Bd -ragged -offset indent
.\".Cd "device iwm3160fw"
.\".Cd "device iwm3168fw"
.\".Cd "device iwm7260fw"
.\".Cd "device iwm7265fw"
.\".Cd "device iwm7265Dfw"
.\".Cd "device iwm8000Cfw"
.\".Cd "device iwm8265fw"
.\".Ed
.\".Pp
.\"Or you can use
Use
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iwmfw"
.Ed
.Pp
to include them all.
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_iwm_load="YES"
iwm3160fw_load="YES"
iwm3168fw_load="YES"
iwm7260fw_load="YES"
iwm7265fw_load="YES"
iwm7265Dfw_load="YES"
iwm8000Cfw_load="YES"
iwm8265fw_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Intel Dual Band Wireless AC 3160
.It Intel Dual Band Wireless AC 3165
.It Intel Dual Band Wireless AC 3168
.It Intel Dual Band Wireless AC 7260
.It Intel Dual Band Wireless AC 7265
.It Intel Dual Band Wireless AC 8260
.It Intel Dual Band Wireless AC 8265
.El
.Pp
.Nm
supports
.Cm station
mode operation.
Only one virtual interface may be configured at any time.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
This driver requires the firmware built with the
.Nm iwmfw
module to work.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.iwm.msi.enable
By default, the driver will use MSI if it is supported.
This behavior can be turned off by setting this tunable to 0.
.It Va hw.iwm.power_scheme
Power management scheme:
1 = active, 2 = balanced (default), 3 = low power
.It Va hw.iwm.lar.disable
Allows disabling LAR (Location Aware Regulatory) feature:
0 = LAR enabled if available (default), 1 = LAR disabled
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev iwm0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
    netmask 0xffffff00
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wlan create wlandev iwm0 ssid my_net up"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev iwm0 ssid my_net \e
	wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 weptxkey 1 up
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 128-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev iwm0 wlanmode adhoc ssid my_net \e
    wepmode on wepkey 0x01020304050607080910111213 weptxkey 1
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "iwm%d: device timeout"
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwm%d: firmware error"
The onboard microcontroller crashed for some reason.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwm%d: fw chunk addr 0x%x len %d failed to load"
Timed out waiting for a segment of the firmware to load.
This should not happen.
.It "iwm%d: could not read firmware %s (error %d)"
The driver failed to load the firmware image using the
.Xr firmware 9
subsystem.
Verify the
.Xr iwmfw 4
firmware module is present.
.It "iwm%d: Failed to start INIT ucode: %d"
An attempt to upload the INIT firmware image to the onboard microcontroller
failed.
This should not happen.
.It "iwm%d: could not load firmware"
An attempt to upload the REGULAR firmware image to the onboard microcontroller
failed.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iwmfw 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr wlan_ccmp 4 ,
.Xr wlan_tkip 4 ,
.Xr wlan_wep 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 5.7 .
