.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Scott Long
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/mfi.4,v 1.13 2010/05/12 17:12:38 brueffer Exp $
.\"
.Dd June 14, 2014
.Dt MFI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mfi
.Nd "LSI MegaRAID SAS driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device mfi"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mfi_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver is for LSI's next generation PCI Express SAS RAID controllers.
Access to RAID arrays (logical disks) from this driver is provided via
.Pa /dev/mfid?
and access to JBOD disks is provided via
.Pa /dev/mfisyspd?
device nodes.
A simple management interface is also provided on a per-controller basis via
the
.Pa /dev/mfi?
device node.
.Pp
The
.Nm
name is derived from the phrase "MegaRAID Firmware Interface", which is
substantially different than the old "MegaRAID" interface and thus requires
a new driver.
.Pp
Older SCSI and SATA MegaRAID cards are supported by
.Xr amr 4
and will not work with this driver.
Likewise, newer LSI MegaRAID SAS controllers are supported by
.Xr mrsas 4
and will not work with this driver.
.Pp
3 Gb/s and 6 Gb/s support both initiator target (IT) and integrated RAID (IR)
firmware (see
.Pa http://kb.lsi.com/KnowledgebaseArticle16266.aspx ) .
The
.Nm
driver supports controllers with an IR image.
At least some cards (such as the
.Tn IBM ServeRAID M1015 )
will attach to the
.Xr mps 4
driver when IT firmware is used.
.Pp
Two sysctls are provided to tune the
.Nm
driver's behavior when a request is made to remove a mounted volume.
By default the driver will disallow any requests to remove a mounted volume.
If the sysctl
.Va dev.mfi.%d.delete_busy_volumes
is set to 1,
then the driver will allow mounted volumes to be removed.
.Pp
A tunable is provided to adjust the
.Nm
driver's behaviour when attaching to a card.
By default the driver will attach to all known cards with high probe priority.
If the tunable
.Va hw.mfi.mrsas_enable
is set to 1,
then the driver will reduce its probe priority to allow
.Cd mrsas
to attach to the card instead of
.Nm .
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.mfi.msi.enable
By default, the driver will use MSI if it is supported.
This behavior can be turned off by setting this tunable to 0.
.It Va hw.mfi.mrsas_enable
See description above.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following hardware:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 1078
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 8408E
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 8480E
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9240-4i
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9240-8i
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9260-4i
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9260-8i
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9260DE-8i
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9260-16i
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9261-8i
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9280-4i4e
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9280-8e
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9280DE-8e
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9280-16i4e
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 9280-24i4e
.It
Dell PERC5
.It
Dell PERC6
.It
Dell PERC H710 Embedded
.It
Dell PERC H710 Adapter
.It
Dell PERC H710 Mini (blades)
.It
Dell PERC H710 Mini (monolithics)
.It
Dell PERC H710P Adapter
.It
Dell PERC H710P Mini (blades)
.It
Dell PERC H710P Mini (monolithics)
.It
Dell PERC H810 Adapter
.It
IBM ServeRAID M1015 SAS/SATA
.It
IBM ServeRAID M5015 SAS/SATA
.It
IBM ServeRAID-MR10i
.It
Intel RAID Controller SROMBSAS18E
.It
Intel RAID Controller RS25DB080
.It
Intel RAID Controller RS25NB008
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/mfisyspd?" -compact
.It Pa /dev/mfid?
array/logical disk interface
.It Pa /dev/mfisyspd?
JBOD disk interface
.It Pa /dev/mfi?
management interface
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "mfid%d: Unable to delete busy device"
An attempt was made to remove a mounted volume.
.It "mfisyspd%d: Unable to delete busy device"
dito for JBOD disks
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr amr 4 ,
.Xr mps 4 ,
.Xr mrsas 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr mfiutil 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Scott Long Aq Mt scottl@FreeBSD.org .
.\".Sh BUGS
.\"The driver does not support big-endian architectures at this time.
