.\" Written by Tom Rhodes for the FreeBSD Project.
.\" Please see the /usr/src/COPYRIGHT file for copyright information.
.\"
.\" This document takes information from the IEEE 802.3 Standard
.\" along with various comments from Peter Wemm, Robert Watson, and Bill Paul.
.\" Originally this file looked much like the NetBSD mii(4) manual page, but
.\" I doubt you would ever notice due to large differences.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/miibus.4,v 1.3.2.6 2004/03/01 09:22:11 brueffer Exp $
.\"
.Dd November 11, 2014
.Dt MIIBUS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm miibus
.Nd IEEE 802.3 Media Independent Interface network bus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For most network interface cards (NIC):
.Cd "device miibus"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides an interconnection between the Media Access Control (MAC)
sublayer, the Physical Layer entities (PHY), Station Management (STA)
entities, and the PHY Layer as defined by the IEEE 802.3 Standard.
.Pp
The
.Nm
layer allows network device drivers to share common support
code for various external PHY devices.
Most 10/100 network interface cards either use an MII transceiver
or have built-in transceivers that can be programmed using an MII
interface.
The
.Nm
driver currently handles all of the media detection,
selection, and reporting using the
.Xr ifmedia 4
interface.
A generic driver has been included for all PHYs that are not
handled by a specific driver, this is possible because all
10/100 PHYs implement the same general register set along with
their vendor specific register set.
.Pp
The following network device drivers use the
.Nm
interface:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width ".Xr stge 4"
.It Xr ae 4
Attansic/Atheros L2 FastEthernet
.It Xr age 4
Attansic/Atheros L1 Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr alc 4
Atheros AR8131/AR8132 Gigabit/Fast Ethernet
.It Xr ale 4
Atheros AR8121/AR8113/AR8114 Gigabit/Fast Ethernet
.It Xr aue 4
ADMtek USB Ethernet
.It Xr axe 4
ASIX Electronics AX88172 USB Ethernet
.It Xr axge 4
ASIX Electronics AX88178A/AX88179 USB Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr bce 4
Broadcom BCM5706/BCM5708 Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr bfe 4
Broadcom BCM440x 10/100 Ethernet
.It Xr bge 4
Broadcom BCM570xx Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr dc 4
DEC/Intel 21143 and various workalikes
.It Xr ed 4
NE[12]000, SMC Ultra, 3c503, DS8390 cards
.It Xr et 4
Agere ET1310 10/100/1000 Ethernet
.It Xr fxp 4
Intel EtherExpress PRO/100B
.It Xr jme 4
JMicron Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr lge 4
Level 1 LXT1001 NetCellerator Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr mos 4
Moschip MCS7730/MCS7830/MCS7832 USB Ethernet
.It Xr msk 4
Marvell/SysKonnect Yukon II Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr nfe 4
NVIDIA nForce MCP 10/100/Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr nge 4
National Semiconductor DP83820/DP83821 Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr pcn 4
AMD Am79C97x PCI 10/100
.It Xr re 4
RealTek 8139C+/8169/8169S/8110S
.It Xr rl 4
RealTek 8129/8139
.\".It Xr rue 4
.\"RealTek RTL8150 USB To Fast Ethernet
.It Xr sf 4
Adaptec AIC-6915
.It Xr sis 4
Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900/SiS 7016
.It Xr sk 4
SysKonnect SK-984x and SK-982x Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr ste 4
Sundance ST201 (D-Link DFE-550TX)
.It Xr stge 4
Sundance/Tamarack TC9021 Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr tl 4
Texas Instruments ThunderLAN
.It Xr tx 4
SMC EtherPower II (83c170)
.It Xr udav 4
Davicom DM9601 USB Ethernet
.It Xr vge 4
VIA Networking Technologies VT6122 PCI Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr vr 4
VIA Rhine, Rhine II
.It Xr wb 4
Winbond W89C840F
.It Xr xl 4
3Com 3c90x
.El
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
The implementation of
.Nm
was originally intended to have similar API interfaces
to
.Bsx 3.0
and
.Nx ,
but as a result are not well behaved newbus device drivers.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ae 4 ,
.Xr age 4 ,
.Xr alc 4 ,
.Xr ale 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr aue 4 ,
.Xr axe 4 ,
.Xr axge 4 ,
.Xr bce 4 ,
.Xr bfe 4 ,
.Xr bge 4 ,
.Xr dc 4 ,
.Xr ed 4 ,
.Xr et 4 ,
.Xr fxp 4 ,
.Xr jme 4 ,
.Xr lge 4 ,
.Xr mos 4 ,
.Xr msk 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr nfe 4 ,
.Xr nge 4 ,
.Xr pcn 4 ,
.Xr re 4 ,
.Xr rl 4 ,
.\".Xr rue 4 ,
.Xr sf 4 ,
.Xr sis 4 ,
.Xr sk 4 ,
.Xr ste 4 ,
.Xr stge 4 ,
.Xr tl 4 ,
.Xr tx 4 ,
.Xr udav 4 ,
.Xr vge 4 ,
.Xr vr 4 ,
.Xr wb 4 ,
.Xr xl 4
.Sh STANDARDS
More information on MII can be found in the IEEE 802.3 Standard.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
