.\" Copyright (c) 2006, Myricom Inc
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Myricom Inc nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/mxge.4,v 1.7.4.2.4.1 2009/04/15 03:14:26 kensmith Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 27, 2013
.Dt MXGE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mxge
.Nd "Myricom Myri10GE 10 Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device mxge"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_mxge_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Express 10 Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on
the Myricom LANai Z8E chip.
The driver supports Transmit/Receive checksum offload,
TCP Segementation Offload (TSO),
multiple reception queues,
multiple tranmission queues and
multiple vector MSI-X.
.\"Support for Jumbo frames is not yet implemented, while support for
.\"as well as Large Receive Offload (LRO) is not
.\"implemented in
Using multiple vector MSI-X requires that Myri10GE NIC be capable of MSI-X.
Older Myri10GE NICs can be field upgraded to add MSI-X using the
"Myri-10G Network Adapter Toolkit" for FreeBSD or Linux
which is available from
.Pa https://www.myricom.com/support/downloads/tools/myri-10g-toolkit.html .
.Pp
For questions related to hardware requirements,
refer to the documentation supplied with your Myri10GE adapter.
All hardware requirements listed apply to use with
.Dx .
For further hardware information, see
.Pa http://www.myricom.com .
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
The
.Nm
driver supports
.Xr polling 4 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports 10 Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the
Myricom LANai Z8E chips:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Myricom 10GBase-CX4 (10G-PCIE-8A-C, 10G-PCIE-8AL-C)
.It
Myricom 10GBase-R (10G-PCIE-8A-R, 10G-PCIE-8AL-R)
.It
Myricom 10G XAUI over ribbon fiber (10G-PCIE-8A-Q, 10G-PCIE-8AL-Q)
.El
.Sh TUNABLES
.Em X
is the device unit number.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.mxge.msix.enable Va hw.mxgeX.msix.enable
By default,
the driver will use MSI-X
if it is supported.
This behaviour can be turned off by setting this tunable to 0.
.It Va hw.mxgeX.msix.offset
If more than 1 slices are enabled,
this tunable specifies the leading target CPU for slice's
transmission and reception queues processing.
The value specificed must be aligned to the number of slices enabled and
must be less than the power of 2 number of CPUs.
.It Va hw.mxge.msi.enable Va hw.mxgeX.msi.enable
If MSI-X is disabled and MSI is supported,
the driver will use MSI.
This behavior can be turned off by setting this tunable to 0.
.It Va hw.mxgeX.msi.cpu
If MSI is used, it specifies the MSI's target CPU.
.It Va hw.mxge.num_slices Va hw.mxgeX.num_slices
If MSI-X is used,
this value determines the maximum number of slices the driver
will attempt to use.
Setting this value to 0 allows driver to enable as many slices
as allowed by the number of CPUs.
Each slice is comprised of one reception queue and one transmission
queue.
The transmission queue of each slice,
except the first slice,
could be disabled.
The default value is 0.
.It Va hw.mxge.multi_tx Va hw.mxgeX.multi_tx
If more then 1 slices are enabled,
this tunable controls whether the tranmission queue of each
slice should be enabled.
Setting this tunable to 0 will only enable the transmission queue
on the first slice.
The default value is 1.
.It Va hw.mxge.use_rss
This tunable controls whether standard RSS input hash function or
chip private input hash function should be used.
Using standard RSS input hash function degenerates reception
performance significantly.
The default value is 0.
.It Va hw.mxge.intr_coal_delay
This value delays the generation of all interrupts in units of
1 microsecond.
The default value is 150.
.It Va hw.mxge.flow_control_enabled
Whether or not hardware flow control is enabled on the adapter.
The default value is 1.
.El
.Sh MIB Variables
A number of per-interface variables are implemented in the
.Va hw.mxge Ns Em X
branch of the
.Xr sysctl 3
MIB.
.Bl -tag -width "flow_control_enabled"
.It Va firmware_version
The version string of firmware that is currently loaded by the driver.
It is read-only.
.It Va use_rss
See tunable
.Va hw.mxge.use_rss .
Flipping its value will cause chip reinitialization.
.It Va intr_coal_delay
See tunable
.Va hw.mxge.intr_coal_delay .
.It Va flow_control_enabled
See tunable
.Va hw.mxge.flow_control_enabled .
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Myricom support website at:
.Pa https://www.myricom.com/support.html .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr firmware 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.3 .
It was first ported to
.Dx 2.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Andrew Gallatin Aq Mt gallatin@FreeBSD.org .
