.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd June 9, 2015
.Dt RADEONKMS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm radeonkms
.Nd Driver for AMD/ATI Radeon graphics chipsets
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the AMD Radeon graphics chips.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxx"
.It Va drm.radeon.no_wb
Disables AGP writeback for scratch registers.
.It Va drm.radeon.dynclks
Enable/Disable dynamic clocks
.\".It Va drm.radeon.r4xx_atom
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.vram_limit
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.agpmode
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.gart_size
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.benchmarking
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.testing
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.connector_table
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.tv
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.audio
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.disp_priority
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.hw_i2c
.\"XXX
.\".It Va drm.radeon.pcie_gen2
.\"XXX
.It Va drm.radeon.msi
Enable/Disable MSI (message signaled interrupts)
1 = enable, 0 = disable, -1 = auto (default)
.\".It Va drm.radeon.lockup_timeout
.\"XXX
.It Va drm.radeon.fastfb
Direct FB access for IGP chips, which can significantly improve performance
for some applications.
This option only affects the RS690, RS780 and RS880 chipsets, and only
when no sideport memory is available.
1 = enable, 0 = disable (default)
.It Va drm.radeon.dpm
DPM (dynamic power management) support.
1 = enable, 0 = disable, -1 = auto (default)
.\".It Va drm.radeon.aspm
.\"XXX
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
If display backlight level can be controlled by the GPU (which is often
the case in notebooks), the sysctl
.Va hw.backlight_level
can be used to adjust the backlight level.
Permitted values are from 0 to the value returned from the
.Va hw.backlight_max
sysctl.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr drm 4 ,
.Xr syscons 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was first available for Linux.
.Sh BUGS
Enabling
.Va drm.radeon.fastfb
on RS690 chipsets can cause graphics corruption when hardware acceleration
is used.
Display backlight control with the
.Va hw.backlight_level
sysctl is only supported for chipsets using AtomBIOS (which includes some
R400 chipsets and all later generations).
