.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 28, 2008
.Dt SLN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sln
.Nd Silan SC92031 10/100 Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device sln"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_sln_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Ethernet adapters based on Silan's SC92031 chip.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following
.Cm media
types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Ar 10baseT/UTP" -compact
.It Ar autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media types and options.
.Pp
.It Ar 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.Pp
.It Ar 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following
.Cm media
options:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width full-duplex -compact
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.Pp
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The following cards are among those supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Noganet KN-8139D
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 1.13
as a port of a
.Fx 4.7
driver provided by Silan.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written by
.An gaoyonghong
and ported to
.Dx
by
.An Sascha Wildner .
