.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 14, 2013
.Dt TWS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tws
.Nd 3ware 9750 series SATA/SAS RAID controllers driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device tws"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tws_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for LSI's 3ware 9750 series
SATA/SAS controllers.
.Pp
These controllers are available in 4, 8, 16 or 24-port configurations,
and support the following RAID levels: 0, 1, 10, 5, 50, 6.
The device nodes for the controllers are of the form
.Pa /dev/tws Ns Ar X ,
where
.Ar X
is the controller number.
The driver is implemented as a SCSI SIM
under CAM, and, as such, the logical units that it controls are accessible
via the device nodes,
.Pa /dev/da Ns Ar Y ,
where
.Ar Y
is the logical unit number.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.tws.msi.enable
By default, the driver will use MSI if it is supported.
This behavior can be turned off by setting this tunable to 0.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following SATA RAID controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
LSI's 3ware SAS 9750-4i
.It
LSI's 3ware SAS 9750-4i4e
.It
LSI's 3ware SAS 9750-8i
.It
LSI's 3ware SAS 9750-8e
.It
LSI's 3ware SAS 9750-16i4e
.It
LSI's 3ware SAS 9750-24i4e
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr twa 4 ,
.Xr twe 4
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.Bd -literal
Copyright (c) 2010, LSI Corp.
All rights reserved.
Author : Manjunath Ranganathaiah
Support: freebsdraid@lsi.com

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
   the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
   distribution.
3. Neither the name of the <ORGANIZATION> nor the names of its
   contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
   from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Ed
