.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Antonio Huete Jimenez
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 4, 2026
.Dt VIRTIO_MMIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm virtio_mmio
.Nd VirtIO memory-mapped I/O transport driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device virtio"
.Cd "device virtio_mmio"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
virtio_mmio_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides the memory-mapped I/O
.Pq MMIO
transport for
.Xr virtio 4 ,
as an alternative to the PCI transport used on emulated PCI buses.
Instead of being discovered on a bus, each transport instance occupies a
fixed window of physical address space and a single interrupt, on top of
which the usual front-end drivers such as
.Xr vtnet 4 ,
.Xr virtio_blk 4
and
.Xr virtio_scsi 4
attach.
.Pp
The driver implements the legacy
.Pq version 1
virtio-mmio register layout.
It does not use FDT or ACPI for enumeration.
Instead, the address, interrupt and optional unit number of each device
are described by the kernel environment
.Pq Xr kenv 1
variables documented below, and the corresponding
.Nm
children are attached to the
.Va nexus
pseudo-bus.
This makes the driver suitable for lightweight virtual machine monitors,
such as QEMU
.Fl M Ar microvm
and Firecracker, that present virtio devices over MMIO rather than PCI.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
The following tunables describe the virtio-mmio devices to attach.
They can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width ".Va hw.virtio.mmio.device_ Ns Ar N"
.It Va hw.virtio.mmio.device
Describes the first virtio-mmio device.
.It Va hw.virtio.mmio.device_ Ns Ar N
Describes an additional virtio-mmio device, where
.Ar N
is a decimal number starting at 1.
The variables are consulted in order and enumeration stops at the first
value of
.Ar N
that is not set, so the numbers must be contiguous.
.El
.Pp
Each variable holds a device description of the form:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Sm off
.Ar size No @ Ar baseaddr : Ar irq Op : Ar unit
.Sm on
.Ed
.Pp
The fields are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Ar baseaddr"
.It Ar size
Size of the device's MMIO register window in bytes.
A single-letter binary suffix
.Pq Cm K , M , G , T , P No or Cm E , case-insensitive
may be appended, each multiplying the value by 1024.
.It Ar baseaddr
Physical base address of the register window.
.It Ar irq
Interrupt number
.Pq GSI
delivered by the device.
.It Ar unit
Optional device unit number.
If omitted, the next available unit is assigned automatically.
.El
.Pp
The
.Ar size ,
.Ar baseaddr ,
.Ar irq
and
.Ar unit
fields accept a leading
.Ql 0x
for hexadecimal or
.Ql 0
for octal, as in
.Xr strtoul 3 .
This is the same syntax used by the Linux
.Va virtio_mmio.device
kernel command-line parameter that many virtual machine monitors emit.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Attach a single virtio-mmio device with a 512-byte register window at
physical address
.Ad 0xd0000000
on interrupt 5, by adding to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.virtio.mmio.device="0x200@0xd0000000:5"
.Ed
.Pp
Attach two devices:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.virtio.mmio.device="512@0xd0000000:5"
hw.virtio.mmio.device_1="512@0xd0000200:6"
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kenv 1 ,
.Xr virtio 4 ,
.Xr virtio_blk 4 ,
.Xr virtio_scsi 4 ,
.Xr vtnet 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr loader 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Dx 6.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was adapted for
.Dx
from the
.Fx
virtio-mmio transport by
.An Antonio Huete Jimenez Aq Mt tuxillo@quantumachine.net .
The
.Fx
command-line and kenv device-discovery support it is based on was written by
.An Colin Percival Aq Mt cperciva@FreeBSD.org .
