.\"	$NetBSD: wbsio.4,v 1.1 2010/02/21 05:16:29 cnst Exp $
.\"	$OpenBSD: wbsio.4,v 1.2 2008/02/17 16:48:47 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Mark Kettenis <kettenis@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd March 8, 2010
.Dt WBSIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wbsio
.Nd Winbond LPC Super I/O
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device isa"
.Cd "device wbsio0 at isa? port 0x2e"
.Cd "device wbsio1 at isa? port 0x4e"
.Cd "device lm"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
lm_load="YES"
wbsio_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Winbond LPC Super I/O ICs.
Only the hardware monitoring function is currently supported.
.Pp
Support for the hardware monitor function is provided through the
.Xr lm 4
driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr lm 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.3 .
.Nx
support was added in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Dx
support was added in
.Dx 2.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mark Kettenis Aq Mt kettenis@openbsd.org .
It was adapted to
.Nx
and
.Dx
by
.An Constantine A. Murenin ,
University of Waterloo.
