.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 10, 2010
.Dt CRIT_ENTER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm crit_enter ,
.Nm crit_enter_gd ,
.Nm crit_enter_id ,
.Nm crit_exit ,
.Nm crit_exit_gd ,
.Nm crit_exit_id
.Nd enter and exit a critical section
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/thread2.h
.Ft void
.Fn crit_enter "void"
.Ft void
.Fn crit_exit "void"
.Ft void
.Fn crit_enter_gd "globaldata_t gd"
.Ft void
.Fn crit_exit_gd "globaldata_t gd"
.Ft void
.Fn crit_enter_id "const char *id"
.Ft void
.Fn crit_exit_id "const char *id"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn crit_enter
and
.Fn crit_exit
functions are used to enter and exit a critical section of code.
Entering a critical section will disallow preemption of the currently
running thread on the current CPU for the duration of the critical section.
While a critical section is active, interrupts and IPIs are also prevented
from executing on the current CPU.
Instead, the interrupt code marks the interrupt as deferred and immediately
returns (without scheduling any interrupt thread).
If an interrupt or an IPI is deferred in this way, it will be processed upon
leaving the critical section.
.Pp
It is possible for a thread to sleep while holding a critical section,
however this results in the critical section being given up for the time of
the sleep and being reacquired after waking up.
.Pp
If the current CPU's globaldata pointer is available,
.Fn crit_enter_gd
and
.Fn crit_exit_gd
may be used to reduce the amount of generated code.
.Pp
Critical sections are per-CPU entities.
They are typically used to interlock operations local to the CPU.
A critical section on one CPU will not prevent an interrupt or IPI from
occurring on some other CPU.
If cross-CPU interlocks are required the more heavy weight
.Xr spinlock 9
or
.Xr serializer 9
lock is recommended instead.
.Pp
Unlike spinlocks and serializer locks, critical sections can be nested.
.Sh DEBUGGING CRITICAL SECTIONS
Kernels compiled with
.Dv DEBUG_CRIT_SECTIONS
will report any
.Fn crit_exit
calls that are made from a different function than the
.Fn crit_enter
that they are unnesting.
The
.Fn crit_enter_id
and
.Fn crit_exit_id
functions can be used to specify a fixed ID in cases where this is done
on purpose.
Identifiers must be string pointers but the debug code only checks the
pointer address, it does not do a
.Fn strcmp
to validate the ID.
.Sh FILES
The critical section implementation is in
.Pa /sys/sys/thread2.h .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr locking 9 ,
.Xr serializer 9 ,
.Xr spinlock 9
.Sh HISTORY
These functions were introduced in
.Dx 1.0 .
