.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd September 18, 2013
.Dt DSCHED 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dsched ,
.Nm dsched_cancel_bio ,
.Nm dsched_debug ,
.Nm dsched_disk_ctx_ref ,
.Nm dsched_disk_ctx_unref ,
.Nm dsched_new_policy_thread_tdio ,
.Nm dsched_register ,
.Nm dsched_strategy_async ,
.Nm dsched_strategy_raw ,
.Nm dsched_thread_io_ref ,
.Nm dsched_thread_io_unref ,
.Nm dsched_unregister ,
.Nm DSCHED_POLICY_MODULE ,
.Nm DSCHED_DISK_CTX_LOCK ,
.Nm DSCHED_DISK_CTX_UNLOCK ,
.Nm DSCHED_THREAD_IO_LOCK ,
.Nm DSCHED_THREAD_IO_UNLOCK ,
.Nm dsched_get_bio_dp ,
.Nm dsched_get_bio_priv ,
.Nm dsched_get_disk_priv
.Nd kernel disk scheduler framework
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/dsched.h
.Pp
Functions:
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_cancel_bio "struct bio *bp"
.Ft int
.Fn dsched_debug "int level" "char *fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_disk_ctx_ref "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_disk_ctx_unref "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_new_policy_thread_tdio "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx" "struct dsched_policy *pol"
.Ft int
.Fn dsched_register "struct dsched_policy *d_policy"
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_strategy_async "struct disk *dp" "struct bio *bp" "biodone_t *done" "void *priv"
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_strategy_raw "struct disk *dp" "struct bio *bp"
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_thread_io_ref "struct dsched_thread_io *tdio"
.Ft void
.Fn dsched_thread_io_unref "struct dsched_thread_io *tdio"
.Ft int
.Fn dsched_unregister "struct dsched_policy *d_policy"
.Pp
Macros:
.Fn DSCHED_POLICY_MODULE "name" "modeventhand_t evh" "version"
.Fn DSCHED_DISK_CTX_LOCK "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Fn DSCHED_DISK_CTX_UNLOCK "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Fn DSCHED_THREAD_IO_LOCK "struct dsched_thread_io *tdio"
.Fn DSCHED_THREAD_IO_UNLOCK "struct dsched_thread_io *tdio"
.Fn dsched_get_bio_dp "struct bio *bio"
.Fn dsched_get_bio_priv "struct bio *bio"
.Fn dsched_get_disk_priv "struct disk *dp" "void *priv"
.Pp
Callbacks:
.Ft typedef int
.Fn dsched_prepare_t "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Ft typedef void
.Fn dsched_teardown_t "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Ft typedef void
.Fn dsched_cancel_t "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Ft typedef int
.Fn dsched_queue_t "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx" "struct dsched_thread_io *tdio" "struct bio *bio"
.Ft typedef void
.Fn dsched_new_tdio_t "struct dsched_thread_io *tdio"
.Ft typedef void
.Fn dsched_destroy_tdio_t "struct dsched_thread_io *tdio"
.Ft typedef void
.Fn dsched_new_diskctx_t "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Ft typedef void
.Fn dsched_destroy_diskctx_t "struct dsched_disk_ctx *diskctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
To create a new dsched policy
.Sq foo
the following is required:
.Bd -literal
DSCHED_POLICY_MODULE(dsched_foo, foo_mod_handler, 1);

struct dsched_policy dsched_foo_policy = {
	.name = "foo",

	.prepare = foo_prepare,
	.teardown = foo_teardown,
	.cancel_all = foo_cancel,
	.bio_queue = foo_queue,

	/* The following are optional */
	.new_tdio = foo_tdio_ctor,
	.new_diskctx = foo_diskctx_ctor,
	.destroy_tdio = foo_tdio_dtor,
	.destroy_diskctx = foo_diskctx_dtor
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa name
is the unique identifier of the dsched policy and the name the user
specifies to set this
.Nm
policy.
.Pp
The
.Fa prepare
callback is called whenever the new
.Nm
policy is set for a new disk.
This can be used to create per disk threads for the
.Nm
policy instance.
Note that any thread created during
.Fa prepare
will not have a
.Ft dsched_thread_ctx
or
.Ft dsched_thread_io
associated with it.
If this is required because the thread will do I/O, the thread itself
needs to call
.Fn dsched_new_policy_thread_tdio .
.Pp
The
.Fa teardown
callback is called whenever a
.Nm
policy is unset/detached from a disk or when a disk is disconnected.
It should clean up all per-disk resources such as any thread created in
.Fa prepare .
The
.Nm
framework guarantees that no more calls to any other method such as
.Fa bio_queue
will occur once
.Fa teardown
has been called.
.Pp
The
.Fa cancel_all
callback is called immediately before
.Fa teardown .
It is required to cancel all
.Vt bio Ns s
currently queued or stalled in the
.Nm
policy instance for the given disk.
The
.Nm
framework guarantees that no more calls to any other method such as
.Fa bio_queue
will occur once
.Fa cancel_all
has been called.
.Pp
The
.Fa bio_queue
callback is called for every
.Vt bio
intended for the disk(s) with the given
.Nm
policy.
It needs to either dispatch it, queue it in any other form for later
dispatch, or return a non-zero return value, in which case the
.Nm
framework will dispatch that
.Vt bio
directly.
If the function took care of the
.Vt bio
and does not want dsched to dispatch it, 0 must be returned.
.Pp
The
.Fa new_tdio
callback is called for every
.Vt dsched_thread_io
created for a disk with this
.Nm
policy.
Similarly, the
.Fa destroy_tdio
callback is called on destruction (release of all references) of the
.Vt dsched_thread_io .
These functions don't have to be specified; if they are left out or
set to
.Dv NULL
they simply won't be called.
.Pp
The
.Fa new_diskctx
callback is called for every
.Vt dsched_disk_ctx
created for a disk with this
.Nm
policy.
Similarly, the
.Fa destroy_diskctx
callback is called on destruction (release of all references) of the
.Vt dsched_disk_ctx .
These functions don't have to be specified; if they are left out or
set to
.Dv NULL ,
they simply won't be called.
.Pp
For convenience, the structs
.Vt dsched_thread_io
and
.Vt dsched_disk_ctx
are allocated with plenty of spare space, so that each policy can extend
these, for example as follows:
.Bd -literal
struct foo_thread_io {
	struct dsched_thread_io head;
	int foo;
	int bar;
};

struct foo_disk_ctx {
	struct dsched_disk_ctx head;
	int foo;
	int bar;
};

CTASSERT(sizeof(struct foo_thread_io) <= DSCHED_THREAD_IO_MAX_SZ);
CTASSERT(sizeof(struct foo_disk_ctx) <= DSCHED_DISK_CTX_MAX_SZ);
.Ed
.Pp
It is important that the first member of the new struct is one of type
.Vt dsched_thread_io
or
.Vt dsched_disk_ctx ,
respectively.
The
.Fn CTASSERT
must be used to ensure that the new structs fit into the space provided
by
.Nm dsched .
Not including these asserts can cause serious and difficult to debug
issues.
For all the functions described in
.Sx FUNCTIONS
that require a
.Vt dsched_thread_io
or
.Vt dsched_disk_ctx ,
the address of the
.Fa head
element should be passed, or alternatively the address of the new struct
be cast to the right type and that passed.
.Sh FUNCTIONS
The
.Fn DSCHED_POLICY_MODULE
macro declares a
.Nm
policy kernel module.
.Fa evh
is the event handler for the module (see
.Xr DECLARE_MODULE 9
for more information).
The event handler is supposed to register a
.Nm
policy with
.Fn dsched_register
on load and to unregister it using
.Fn dsched_unregister
when it is unloaded.
.Fa version
is the version number of the module (see
.Xr MODULE_VERSION 9
for more information).
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_strategy_async
function dispatches a
.Vt bio Fa bp
in an asynchronous manner to the disk specified by
.Fa dp .
The private data
.Fa priv
will be attached to the
.Vt bio
and is later retrievable via
.Fn dsched_get_bio_priv .
The
.Vt biodone_t
routine
.Fa done
will be called once the
.Vt bio
completes.
The
.Fa done
routine can use
.Fn dsched_get_disk_priv ,
.Fn dsched_get_bio_dp
and
.Fn dsched_get_bio_priv
to retrieve the context.
Since
.Fn dsched_strategy_async
also saves the current time (via
.Fn getmicrotime )
in
.Fa bio->bio_caller_info3.tv ,
the
.Fa done
routine can also calculate the time passed from dispatch to completion
by getting the current time again (via
.Fn getmicrotime )
and calculating the timeval difference to the value stored in
.Fa bio->bio_caller_info3.tv .
At the end of the
.Fa done
routine it needs to call
.Fn pop_bio
and
.Fn biodone
as for any other
.Vt biodone_t
routine.
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_cancel_bio
function cancels the
.Vt bio
and sets
.Er ENXIO
as error on the buf.
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_strategy_raw
function simply dispatches the
.Vt bio
directly to the disk specified by
.Fa dp
using
.Fn dev_dstrategy .
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_debug
function works as a conditional
.Fn kprintf .
Depending on the setting of the
.Va dsched.debug
.Xr sysctl 8
variable, the debug info will be shown or not.
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_register
function registers the policy described by
.Fa d_policy
as a valid
.Nm
policy which can then be used as a scheduler policy for the disks.
If a policy with the given name already exists,
.Er EEXIST
is returned (otherwise 0).
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_unregister
function unregisters the policy described by
.Fa d_policy .
The given
.Nm
policy will no longer be valid as a scheduler policy.
If the given policy is currently in use,
.Er EBUSY
will be returned and the policy won't be unregistered; otherwise 0 is returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn DSCHED_THREAD_IO_LOCK
and
.Fn DSCHED_THREAD_IO_UNLOCK
functions lock and unlock a
.Vt dsched_thread_io
.Fa tdio ,
respectively.
The lock must be held whenever the members
.Fa queue
and
.Fa qlength
are manipulated to avoid messing up the
.Vt TAILQ .
It can also be used to serialize any other access to the derived
.Vt foo_thread_io
members.
.Pp
The
.Fn DSCHED_DISK_CTX_LOCK
and
.Fn DSCHED_DISK_CTX_UNLOCK
functions lock and unlock a
.Vt dsched_disk_ctx
.Fa diskctx ,
respectively.
The lock must be held whenever the member
.Fa queue
is manipulated to avoid messing up the
.Vt TAILQ .
It can also be used to serialize any other access to the derived
.Vt foo_disk_ctx
members.
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_thread_io_ref
and
.Fn dsched_thread_io_unref
functions increase and decrease the reference count on a
.Vt dsched_thread_io
.Fa tdio ,
respectively.
Whenever the reference count drops to 0, the
.Fa tdio
will be released.
Be aware that it is possible that the
.Nm
framework holds references on the
.Fa tdio ,
too, so it can be that the object is not freed when all
references are dropped.
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_disk_ctx_ref
and
.Fn dsched_disk_ctx_unref
functions increase and decrease the reference count on a
.Vt dsched_disk_ctx
.Fa diskctx ,
respectively.
Whenever the reference count drops to 0, the
.Fa diskctx
will be released.
Be aware that it is possible that the
.Nm
framework holds references on the
.Fa diskctx ,
too, so it can be that the object is not freed when all
references are dropped.
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_get_bio_dp ,
.Fn dsched_get_disk_priv
and
.Fn dsched_get_bio_priv
are intended for use in the
.Vt biodone_t
routine specified in the call to
.Fn dsched_strategy_async .
.Fn dsched_get_bio_dp
retrieves the
.Vt struct disk
associated with the
.Vt bio .
This can then be used to retrieve the
.Vt struct dsched_disk_ctx
via
.Fn dsched_get_disk_priv .
The
.Fn dsched_get_bio_priv
function returns the private data associated with the
.Fa bio
on the call to
.Fn dsched_strategy_async .
.Pp
The
.Fn dsched_new_policy_thread_tdio
function must be called from any thread created within the
.Fa prepare
method that will perform I/O, since these won't have a
.Vt dsched_thread_io
associated with them.
.Sh FILES
The uncontended path of the
.Nm
implementation is in
.Pa /sys/kern/kern_dsched.c .
The data structures are in
.Pa /sys/sys/dsched.h .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dsched 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
framework first appeared in
.Dx 2.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
framework was written by
.An Alex Hornung .
