.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $DragonFly: src/share/man/man9/firmware.9,v 1.1 2007/09/14 22:53:56 swildner Exp $
.\"
.Dd September 15, 2007
.Dt FIRMWARE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm firmware_image_load ,
.Nm firmware_image_unload
.Nd firmware support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/firmware.h
.Ft struct fw_image *
.Fn firmware_image_load "const char *image_name"
.Ft void
.Fn firmware_image_unload "struct fw_image *img"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm firmware
interface provides functions for loading and unloading of firmware images.
.Pp
The
.Fn firmware_image_load
function loads the firmware
.Fa image_name
into the kernel and returns a pointer to a
.Vt struct fw_image.
The
.Fn firmware_image_unload
function unloads the image associated with
.Fa img
(obtained with a previous call to
.Fn firmware_image_load ) .
.Pp
Images have to reside in
.Pa /etc/firmware
in order for these functions to work.
This requires the root partition being mounted.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm firmware
framework first appeared in
.Dx 1.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Johannes Hofmann
.An Joerg Sonnenberger
