.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003, 2004 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The DragonFly Project
.\" by Hiten Pandya <hmp@backplane.com>.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd June 6, 2012
.Dt HASHINIT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hashinit ,
.Nm hashinit_ext ,
.Nm hashdestroy ,
.Nm phashinit ,
.Nm phashinit_ext
.Nd generic hash table functions for the kernel
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/systm.h
.In sys/malloc.h
.Ft void *
.Fn hashinit "int count" "struct malloc_type *type" "u_long *hashmask"
.Ft void *
.Fn hashinit_ext "int count" "size_t size" "struct malloc_type *type" "u_long *hashmask"
.Ft void
.Fn hashdestroy "void *hashtbl" "struct malloc_type *type" "u_long hashmask"
.Ft void *
.Fn phashinit "int count" "struct malloc_type *type" "u_long *nentries"
.Ft void *
.Fn phashinit_ext "int count" "size_t size" "struct malloc_type *type" "u_long *nentries"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The kernel hash functions are used for creating a generic hash table.
.Pp
The
.Fn hashinit
function returns a pointer to a hash table which is sized a
.Dq "power of two"
greater or equal to the element
.Fa count
requested.
The masking value is stored in
.Fa hashmask .
.Pp
The
.Fn phashinit
function returns a pointer to a prime number sized hash table.
The element
.Fa count
requested is used to dictate an upper-bound for the size of the
hash table.
The final size of the hash table is stored by the function in
.Fa nentries .
.Pp
The
.Fa type
argument to both of the above functions is used for keeping track
of memory allocated for the hash table.
See the
.Xr kmalloc 9
manual page for more information on memory statistics.
.Pp
The
.Fn hashinit_ext
and
.Fn phashinit_ext
functions are extended versions of
.Fn hashinit
and
.Fn phashinit
which take the
.Fa size
of the structure as an additional argument and will zero the array instead
of assuming that it is an array of
.Dv LIST_HEAD Ns s .
.Pp
The
.Fn hashdestroy
function frees the space occupied by the hash table pointed to by argument
.Fa hashtbl .
Argument
.Fa type
determines the malloc arena to use when freeing space.
The argument
.Fa hashmask
should be the bit mask returned by the call to
.Fn hashinit
that allocated the hash table.
The argument
.Fa flags
must be used with one of the following values.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr udp 4 ,
.Xr kmalloc 9 ,
.Xr nlookup 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Hiten Pandya Aq Mt hmp@backplane.com .
.Sh BUGS
There is no
.Fn phashdestroy
function, and using
.Fn hashdestroy
to free a hash table allocated by
.Fn phashinit
usually has grave consequences.
