.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Vishesh Yadav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd August 15, 2012
.Dt IDR 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm idr ,
.Nm idr_destroy ,
.Nm idr_find ,
.Nm idr_for_each ,
.Nm idr_get_new ,
.Nm idr_get_new_above ,
.Nm idr_init ,
.Nm idr_init1 ,
.Nm idr_pre_get ,
.Nm idr_remove ,
.Nm idr_remove_all ,
.Nm idr_replace
.Nd Integer ID management library
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/idr.h
.Ft void
.Fn idr_destroy "struct idr *idp"
.Ft void *
.Fn idr_find "struct idr *idp" "int id"
.Ft int
.Fn idr_for_each "struct idr *idp" "int (*fn)(int id, void *p, void *data)" "void *data"
.Ft int
.Fn idr_get_new "struct idr *idp" "void *ptr" "int *id"
.Ft int
.Fn idr_get_new_above "struct idr *idp" "void *ptr" "int sid" "int *id"
.Ft void
.Fn idr_init "struct idr *idp"
.Ft void
.Fn idr_init1 "struct idr *idp" "int size"
.Ft int
.Fn idr_pre_get "struct idr *idp"
.Ft void
.Fn idr_remove "struct idr *idp" "int id"
.Ft void
.Fn idr_remove_all "struct idr *idp"
.Ft void *
.Fn idr_replace "struct idr *idp" "void *ptr" "int id"
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
.Fn idr_destroy "struct idr *idp"
.Pp
Free all resources taken by given idr handle.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_find "struct idr *idp" "int id"
.Pp
Return data pointer mapped with given id.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_for_each "struct idr *idp" "int (*fn)(int id, void *p, void *data)" "void *data"
.Pp
Iterate through all pointers registered with given idr handle and call the
callback function 'fn' for each pointer. It is not safe to modify the idr tree
through the callback function.
.Pp
If the callback function returns a non-zero integer, we stop and return the
value.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_get_new "struct idr *idp" "void *ptr" "int *id",
.Fn idr_get_new_above "struct idr *idp" "void *ptr" "int sid" "int *id"
.Pp
Allocates a new integer mapped with pointer 'ptr'. The new id will be stored
in 'id'. If the tree get full, function will return EAGAIN.
.Fn idr_pre_get
should be called to grow the tree.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_init "struct idr *idp",
.Fn idr_init1 "struct idr *idp" "int size"
.Pp
Initialize idr handle that will be used by other functions of the API.
.Fn idr_init
initializes tree with hard coded default initial capacity (32).
.Fn idr_init1
takes additional parameter 'size' to set the initial capacity manually.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_pre_get "struct idr *idp"
.Pp
This function should be called prior to calling the idr_get_new* functions. It
preallocates enough memory for subsequent calls to idr_get_new* functions. This 
function should be called without any locks held.
.Pp
This function returns 0 if enough memory couldn't be allocated, otherwise 1.
.Pp
This function lacks 'gfp_t gfp_mask' parameter that is found in Linux version of
this API.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_remove "struct idr *idp" "int id",
.Pp
Remove the given id from tree.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_remove_all "struct idr *idp"
.Pp
Remove all entries in the idr tree.
.
.Pp
.Fn idr_replace "struct idr *idp" "void *ptr" "int id"
.Pp
Replace pointer for given id with new pointer.
.Pp
NULL is returned if pointer is not found. This behavior is different from the
Linux API.
.
