.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $DragonFly: src/share/man/man9/ieee80211_crypto.9,v 1.3 2006/06/28 19:41:59 swildner Exp $
.\"
.Dd June 28, 2006
.Dt IEEE80211_CRYPTO 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ieee80211_crypto_encap
.Nd 802.11 encryption function
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netproto/802_11/ieee80211_var.h
.Ft struct ieee80211_key *
.Fo ieee80211_crypto_encap
.Fa "struct ieee80211com *ic" "struct ieee80211_node *ni" "struct mbuf *m"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This function provides software encryption support
for 802.11 device drivers.
.Pp
.\"
The
.Fn ieee80211_crypto_encap
function runs the appropriate encryption algorithm over the 802.11
encapsulated frame held in the mbuf chain
.Fa m ,
for transmission on the interface
.Fa ic .
The
.Fa ni
argument specifies the target to which the encrypted frame will be transmitted.
It must not be
.Dv NULL ,
and is typically the return value of
.Xr ieee80211_find_txnode 9 .
.\"
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The key used to encrypt unicast frames is stored in
.Fa ni .
.\"
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
the key used to encrypt the frame is returned.
Otherwise,
.Dv NULL
is returned.
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ieee80211 9 ,
.Xr ifnet 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ieee80211
series of functions first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 ,
and were later ported to
.Fx 4.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This man page was written by
.An Sepherosa Ziehau
and
.An Sascha Wildner .
