.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 13, 2010
.Dt MAKE_AUTOCLONE_DEV 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm make_autoclone_dev ,
.Nm destroy_autoclone_dev ,
.Nm devfs_clone_bitmap_init ,
.Nm devfs_clone_bitmap_uninit ,
.Nm devfs_clone_bitmap_fff ,
.Nm devfs_clone_bitmap_chk ,
.Nm devfs_clone_bitmap_set ,
.Nm devfs_clone_bitmap_get ,
.Nm devfs_clone_bitmap_put ,
.Nm DEVFS_DECLARE_CLONE_BITMAP ,
.Nm DEVFS_CLONE_BITMAP
.Nd device clone functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/conf.h
.In sys/devfs.h
.Ft cdev_t
.Fn make_autoclone_dev "struct dev_ops *ops" "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap" "d_clone_t *nhandler" "uid_t uid" "gid_t gid" "int perms" "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn destroy_autoclone_dev "cdev_t dev" "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap"
.Ft void
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_init "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap"
.Ft void
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_uninit "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap"
.Ft int
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_fff "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap"
.Ft int
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_chk "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap" "int unit"
.Ft void
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_set "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap" "int unit"
.Ft int
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_get "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap" "int limit"
.Ft void
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_put "struct devfs_bitmap *bitmap" "int unit"
.Fn DEVFS_DECLARE_CLONE_BITMAP "name"
.Fn DEVFS_CLONE_BITMAP "name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn make_autoclone_dev
creates a
.Vt cdev_t
with the default
.Fa ops ,
visible in the
.Xr devfs 5
namespace, that (when opened) will invoke the clone handler specified by
.Fa nhandler .
If a
.Vt devfs_bitmap *
is specified, the given
.Fa bitmap
is initialized using
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_init .
.Pp
The clone handler must be defined as follows:
.Bd -literal
d_clone_t mydev_clone;

int
mydev_clone(struct dev_clone_args *ap)
{
};
.Ed
.Pp
When called, the handler is passed a pointer to a populated
.Vt dev_clone_args
structure, which is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal
struct dev_clone_args {
        struct dev_generic_args a_head;
        struct cdev     *a_dev;
        const char      *a_name;
        size_t           a_namelen;
        struct ucred    *a_cred;
        int              a_mode;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Fa a_head.a_dev
is the
.Vt cdev_t
of the accessed autoclone device.
.Fa a_name
and
.Fa a_namelen
are the registered clonable base name and its length, as specified to
.Fn make_autoclone_dev .
.Fa a_mode
and
.Fa a_cred
contain the mode and cred passed to the autoclone device's
.Fn open .
.Pp
The clone handler must set
.Fa a_dev
to a new
.Vt cdev_t ,
returned by a call to
.Fn make_only_dev .
.Fa a_dev
may also be set to
.Dv NULL ,
in which case the
.Fn open
will ultimately fail with
.Er ENXIO .
If
.Fa a_dev
is
.Pf non- Ns Dv NULL ,
it is automatically made visible and linked into
.Xr devfs 5
as if it was created with
.Fn make_dev .
Thus,
.Fn destroy_dev
should be used to destroy the cloned
.Vt cdev_t
once it is no longer required,
usually during
.Fn close .
.Pp
.Fn destroy_autoclone_dev
destroys a
.Vt cdev_t
created by
.Fn make_autoclone_dev
unregistering its clone handler and (if non-NULL) also uninitializes its
.Fa bitmap
using
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_uninit .
.Pp
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_init
initializes the given clone
.Fa bitmap
so it is ready to use.
.Pp
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_uninit
frees the memory associated with the specified clone
.Fa bitmap
and leaves it unusable.
.Pp
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_fff
returns the first unused unit in
.Fa bitmap .
To use this unit, it has to be acquired by a call to
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_set .
.Pp
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_chk
checks if
.Fa unit
is in use (set) and returns 1 if it is; otherwise 0 is returned.
.Pp
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_set
marks
.Fa unit
in
.Fa bitmap
as used, so further calls to
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_fff
or
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_get
cannot retrieve it.
If one intends to use a clone handler along with preallocated devices, it
is recommended to block the unit numbers of the preallocated devices by
calling
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_set
on them.
.Pp
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_put
marks
.Fa unit
in the
.Fa bitmap
as unused so further calls to
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_fff
or
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_get
can retrieve it again.
.Pp
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_get
is a shortcut to
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_fff
and
.Fn devfs_clone_bitmap_set .
It will return the first unused unit number and also mark it as used.
.Pp
The
.Fn DEVFS_DECLARE_CLONE_BITMAP
macro declares a clone bitmap with the specified
.Fa name .
As long as the name specified is unique, this macro can be used to declare
global variables.
.Pp
The
.Fn DEVFS_CLONE_BITMAP
is a macro which expands the specified
.Fa name
to the full name of a clone bitmap.
It is used in conjunction with
.Fn DEVFS_DECLARE_CLONE_BITMAP ,
as it uses the same name.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Xr devfs 5
clone facilities and the associated functions all appeared in
.Dx 2.3 .
.Sh AUTHOR
.An Alex Hornung
