.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010, The DragonFly Project.
.\"
.\" This software is derived from software contributed to the DragonFly Project
.\" by Venkatesh Srinivas <me@endeavour.zapto.org>.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR OTHER DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd December 21, 2010
.Dt MPIPE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mpipe_init ,
.Nm mpipe_done ,
.Nm mpipe_alloc_nowait ,
.Nm mpipe_alloc_waitok ,
.Nm mpipe_free
.Nd malloc pipelines
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/mpipe.h
.Ft void
.Fn mpipe_init "malloc_pipe_t mpipe" "malloc_type_t type" "int bytes" \
"int nnom" "int nmax" "int mpflags" \
"void (*construct)(void *, void *)" \
"void (*deconstruct)(void *, void *)" \
"void *priv"
.Ft void
.Fn mpipe_done "malloc_pipe_t mpipe"
.Ft void *
.Fn mpipe_alloc_nowait "malloc_pipe_t mpipe"
.Ft void *
.Fn mpipe_alloc_waitok "malloc_pipe_t mpipe"
.Ft void
.Fn mpipe_free "malloc_pipe_t mpipe" "void *buf"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A malloc pipeline is a linear pool of buffers of a single type.
A malloc
pipeline guarantees a number of outstanding allocations and provides both
blocking and non-blocking behavior above the guaranteed allocation amounts.
A malloc pipeline can have an upper limit, beyond which allocations sleep
or fail respectively.
Malloc pipelines are intended for situations where
a minimum number of buffers are required to make progress.
.Pp
The
.Fn mpipe_init
function initializes a malloc pipeline
.Fa mpipe .
The pipeline allocates buffers of size
.Fa bytes
from the malloc zone
.Fa type .
The pipeline is prefilled with
.Fa nnom
buffers and has a limit of
.Fa nmax
buffers.
The
.Fa construct
argument is a callback, invoked when a buffer is allocated from the system.
The
.Fa deconstruct
argument is a callback, invoked when the malloc pipeline is destroyed or a
buffer is freed to the system.
Both
.Fa construct
and
.Fa deconstruct
are invoked with the buffer address as their first parameter and with
.Fa priv
as their second parameter.
The
.Fa flags
argument controls allocation parameters:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv MPF_NOZERO" -offset indent
.It Dv MPF_NOZERO
Do not zero allocated buffers.
.It Dv MPF_CACHEDATA
By default, MPIPE buffers are zeroed on free; this flag disables that behavior.
.It Dv MPF_INT
Allocations may use the interrupt memory reserve.
.El
.Pp
This function may block.
.Pp
The
.Fn mpipe_done
function destroys a malloc pipeline.
The pipeline's destructor is invoked on
each buffer and then they are returned to the system.
It is an error to invoke
this function on a pipeline with outstanding allocations.
This function may block.
.Pp
The
.Fn mpipe_alloc_nowait
function allocates a buffer from the malloc pipeline.
It will first allocate from the pipeline itself; if that is exhausted,
it will fall back on
.Xr kmalloc 9 ,
up to the pipeline maximum.
This function may not block.
.Pp
The
.Fn mpipe_alloc_waitok
function allocates a buffer from the malloc pipeline.
It will first allocate from the pipeline; if that is exhausted,
it will fall back on
.Xr kmalloc 9 ,
up to the pipeline maximum.
It will sleep if it reaches the maximum, potentially releasing any tokens.
.Pp
The
.Fn mpipe_free
function frees a buffer to the malloc pipeline.
If the pipeline is full, it will free directly to the kernel allocator,
calling the destructor as it does.
This function may block.
.Sh FILES
The MPIPE implementation is in
.Pa /sys/kern/kern_mpipe.c .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr memory 9
.Sh HISTORY
MPIPE first appeared in
.Dx 1.0 .
