.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 30, 2016
.Dt NLOOKUP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nlookup ,
.Nm nlookup_init ,
.Nm nlookup_init_at ,
.Nm nlookup_init_raw ,
.Nm nlookup_init_root ,
.Nm nlookup_zero ,
.Nm nlookup_done ,
.Nm nlookup_done_at ,
.Nm nlookup_simple ,
.Nm nlookup_mp ,
.Nm nreadsymlink ,
.Nm naccess ,
.Nm naccess_va
.Nd namecache API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/nlookup.h
.Ft int
.Fn nlookup "struct nlookupdata *nd"
.Ft int
.Fn nlookup_init "struct nlookupdata *nd" "const char *path" "enum uio_seg seg" "int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn nlookup_init_at "struct nlookupdata *nd" "struct file **fpp" "int fd" "const char *path" "enum uio_seg seg" "int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn nlookup_init_raw "struct nlookupdata *nd" "const char *path" "enum uio_seg seg" "int flags" "struct ucred *cred" "struct namecache *ncstart"
.Ft int
.Fn nlookup_init_root "struct nlookupdata *nd" "const char *path" "enum uio_seg seg" "int flags" "struct ucred *cred" "struct namecache *ncstart" "struct namecache *ncroot"
.Ft void
.Fn nlookup_zero "struct nlookupdata *nd"
.Ft void
.Fn nlookup_done "struct nlookupdata *nd"
.Ft void
.Fn nlookup_done_at "struct nlookupdata *nd" "struct file *fp"
.Ft "struct namecache *"
.Fn nlookup_simple "const char *str" "enum uio_seg seg" "int niflags" "int *error"
.Ft int
.Fn nlookup_mp "struct mount *mp" "struct namecache **ncpp"
.Ft int
.Fn nreadsymlink "struct nlookupdata *nd" "struct namecache *ncp" "struct nlcomponent *nlc"
.Ft int
.Fn naccess "struct namecache *ncp" "int vmode" "struct ucred *cred"
.Ft int
.Fn naccess_va "struct vattr *va" "int vmode" "struct ucred *cred"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn nlookup
does a generic namecache lookup.
Note that the passed
.Fa "struct nlookupdata"
is not
.Fn nlookup_done Ap d
on return, even if an error occurs.
If no error occurs the returned nl_ncp
is always referenced and locked, otherwise it may or may not be.
Intermediate directory elements, including the current directory,
require execute (search) permission.
.Fn nlookup
does not examine the access permissions on the returned element.
If
.Dv NLC_CREATE
or
.Dv NLC_DELETE
is set the last directory must allow
node creation
.Po
.Dv VCREATE Ns / Ns Dv VDELETE
.Pc ,
and an error code of 0
will be returned for a non-existent target.
Otherwise a non-existent target will cause
.Er ENOENT
to be returned.
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_init
initializes a
.Fa "struct nlookupdata" ,
and does an early error
return for copyin faults or a degenerate empty string (which is
not allowed).
The first process proc0's
credentials are used if the calling
thread is not associated with a process context.
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_init_at
is similar to
.Fn nlookup_init
except that when
.Fa path
is a relative path and
.Fa fd
is not
.Dv AT_FDCWD ,
.Fa path
is interpreted relative to the directory associated with
.Fa fd
and the file entry for
.Fa fd
is referenced and returned in
.Fa *fpp .
Its main use is the implementation of
.Fn *at
system calls.
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_init_raw
works similarly to
.Fn nlookup_init
but does not assume a process context.
rootncp is always chosen for the root directory and the
.Fa cred
and starting directory are supplied in the arguments.
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_init_root
works similarly to
.Fn nlookup_init_raw
but does not assume rootnch for the root directory.
The root directory is supplied in the arguments, and is also
used for the jail directory.
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_zero
zeroes a given
.Fa "struct nlookupdata" .
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_done
cleans up an
.Fa nlookupdata
structure after we are through with
it.
This function may be called on any nlookupdata structure
initialized with
.Fn nlookup_init .
Calling
.Fn nlookup_done
is mandatory in all cases except where
.Fn nlookup_init
returns an error, even if as a consumer you believe you
have taken all dynamic elements out of the
.Fa nlookupdata
structure.
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_done_at
cleans up an
.Fa nlookupdata
structure that was initialized with
.Fn nlookup_init_at
and drops the reference to
.Fa fp .
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_simple
is a simple all-in-one
.Fn nlookup .
It returns a locked namecache structure or NULL if an error
occurred.
Note that the returned ncp
is not checked for permissions,
though
.Dv VEXEC
is checked on the directory path leading up to
the result.
The caller must call
.Fn naccess
to check the permissions of the returned leaf.
.Pp
.Fn nlookup_mp
is used to resolve a mount point's glue ncp.
It creates the illusion of continuity in the namecache tree
by connecting the ncp related to the vnode under the mount
to the ncp related to the mount's root vnode.
If no error occurred a locked, ref'd ncp is stored in
.Fa *ncpp .
.Pp
.Fn nreadsymlink
reads the contents of a symlink, allocates a path buffer out
of the namei_zone and initialize the supplied nlcomponent
with the result.
If an error occurs no buffer will be allocated or returned
in the nlc.
.Pp
.Fn naccess
generally checks the V* access bits from
.In sys/vnode.h .
All specified bits must pass for this function to return 0.
If
.Dv VCREATE
is specified and the target ncp represents a
non-existent file or dir, or if
.Dv VDELETE
is specified and the
target exists, the parent directory is checked for
.Dv VWRITE .
If
.Dv VEXCL
is specified and the target ncp represents a positive
hit, an error is returned.
If
.Dv VCREATE
is not specified and the target does not exist
(negative hit),
.Er ENOENT
is returned.
Note that
.Fn nlookup
does not (and should not) return
.Er ENOENT
for non-existent leafs.
The passed ncp may or may not be locked.
The caller should use a locked ncp on leaf lookups, especially
for
.Dv VCREATE ,
.Dv VDELETE ,
and
.Dv VEXCL
checks.
.Pp
.Fn naccess_va
checks the requested access against the given
.Fa vattr
using
.Fa cred .
.Sh FILES
.Pa sys/kern/vfs_nlookup.c
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr VFS 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Sascha Wildner .
