.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007
.\"	The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 17, 2014
.Dt SERIALIZER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lwkt_serialize_init ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_enter ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_adaptive_enter ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_try ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_exit ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_handler_enable ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_handler_disable ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_handler_call ,
.Nm lwkt_serialize_handler_try ,
.Nm LWKT_SERIALIZE_INITIALIZER ,
.Nm ASSERT_SERIALIZED ,
.Nm ASSERT_NOT_SERIALIZED
.Nd generic low level serializer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/serialize.h
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_serialize_init "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_serialize_enter "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_serialize_adaptive_enter "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Ft int
.Fn lwkt_serialize_try "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_serialize_exit "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_enable "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_disable "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Ft void
.Fo lwkt_serialize_handler_call
.Fa "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Fa "void (*func)(void *, void *)"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fa "void *frame"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo lwkt_serialize_handler_try
.Fa "lwkt_serialize_t s"
.Fa "void (*func)(void *, void *)"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fa "void *frame"
.Fc
.Pp
.Nm LWKT_SERIALIZE_INITIALIZER ;
.Fn ASSERT_SERIALIZED "s"
.Fn ASSERT_NOT_SERIALIZED "s"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm serializer
API provides a fast locked-bus-cycle-based serialization facility
that will serialize across blocking conditions.
It is very similar to a lock but much faster for the common case.
.Pp
This API was initially designed to be a replacement for SPL calls,
but may be used whenever a low level exclusive lock (serialization)
and/or interrupt/device interaction is required.
If it is used by interrupt,
callers should enter critical section to prevent the current thread
holding the serializer being preempted by interrupt thread
which may try to hold the same serializer.
Unlike tokens this serialization is not safe from deadlocks
nor is it recursive,
and care must be taken when using it.
Note that
.Xr tsleep 9
will not release a serializer that is being held.
.Pp
There are two primary facilities \(em the serializer facility itself and
an integrated non-stackable interrupt handler disablement facility
used by drivers.
.Pp
.Fn lwkt_serialize_init ,
.Fn lwkt_serialize_enter
and
.Fn lwkt_serialize_exit
respectively initialize, hold and release the serializer
.Fa s .
.Fn lwkt_serialize_try
is a non-blocking version of
.Fn lwkt_serialize_enter .
.Pp
.Fn lwkt_serialize_adaptive_enter
is a special version of
.Fn lwkt_serialize_enter
which will try to spin a bit before the current thread is put to sleep
if the serializer
.Fa s
is contended.
By default,
.Fn lwkt_serialize_adaptive_enter
favors spinning over sleeping.
.Pp
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_disable ,
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_enable
and
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_call
respectively disable, enable and call an interrupt handler
.Fa func
for the serializer
.Fa s .
The arguments
.Fa arg
and
.Fa frame
will be passed to the handler.
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_try
is a non-blocking version of
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_call .
.Pp
The macro
.Nm LWKT_SERIALIZE_INITIALIZER
evaluates to an initializer for the serializer.
.Pp
The
.Fn ASSERT_SERIALIZED
and
.Fn ASSERT_NOT_SERIALIZED
macros assert that the serializer
.Fa s
is being held/not held.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn lwkt_serialize_handler_try
function return 0 on success and 1 on failure.
The
.Fn lwkt_serialize_try
function return 1 on success and 0 on failure.
.Sh FILES
The serializer itself is implemented in
.Pa /sys/kern/lwkt_serialize.c .
The header file
.Pa /sys/sys/serialize.h
describes the public interface and the structure of a serializer.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crit_enter 9 ,
.Xr spinlock 9 ,
.Xr zsleep 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm serializer
API first appeared in
.Dx 1.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm serializer
API was written by
.An Matt Dillon .
This manual page was written by
.An Hasso Tepper .
