.\"	$NetBSD: store.9,v 1.2 1996/01/09 21:59:27 perry Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Jason R. Thorpe.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed by Kenneth Stailey.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed for the NetBSD Project
.\"	by Jason R. Thorpe.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/store.9,v 1.7.2.4 2001/12/17 11:30:19 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 26, 2017
.Dt STORE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm store ,
.Nm casu32 ,
.Nm casu64 ,
.Nm subyte ,
.Nm suword32 ,
.Nm suword64
.Nd store data to user-space
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/time.h
.In sys/systm.h
.In sys/resourcevar.h
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn casu32 "volatile uint32_t *p" "uint32_t oldval" "uint32_t newval"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn casu64 "volatile uint64_t *p" "uint64_t oldval" "uint64_t newval"
.Ft int
.Fn subyte "uint8_t *base" "uint8_t byte"
.Ft int
.Fn suword32 "uint32_t *base" "int word"
.Ft int
.Fn suword64 "uint64_t *base" "uint64_t word"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
functions are designed to copy small amounts of data to user-space.
.Pp
The
.Nm
routines provide the following functionality:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fn suword32"
.It Fn casu32
Compares the 32 bit
.Fa oldval
with the 32 bits at
.Fa base ,
and if equal,
.Fa base
is set to
.Fa newval .
The old value at
.Fa base
is then returned.
.It Fn casu64
Compares the 64 bit
.Fa oldval
with the 64 bits at
.Fa base ,
and if equal,
.Fa base
is set to
.Fa newval .
The old value at
.Fa base
is then returned.
.It Fn subyte
Stores a byte of data to the user-space address
.Fa base .
.It Fn suword32
Stores 32 bits of data to the user-space address
.Fa base .
.It Fn suword64
Stores 64 bits of data to the user-space address
.Fa base .
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Nm
functions return 0 on success or -1 on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr copy 9 ,
.Xr fetch 9
