.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010, The DragonFly Project.
.\"
.\" This software is derived from software contributed to the DragonFly Project
.\" by Venkatesh Srinivas <me@endeavour.zapto.org>.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR OTHER DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd August 19, 2010
.Dt SYSTIMER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm systimer_init_periodic ,
.Nm systimer_init_periodic_nq ,
.Nm systimer_adjust_periodic ,
.Nm systimer_init_oneshot
.Nd periodic callbacks
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/systimer.h
.Ft void
.Fn systimer_init_periodic "systimer_t info" "systimer_func_t func" "void *data" "int hz"
.Ft void
.Fn systimer_init_periodic_nq "systimer_t info" "systimer_func_t func" "void *data" "int hz"
.Ft void
.Fn systimer_adjust_periodic "systimer_t info" "int hz"
.Ft void
.Fn systimer_init_oneshot "systimer_t info" "systimer_func_t func" "void *data" "int us"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Systimers invoke callbacks at either fixed frequencies or after time delays.
The callbacks are invoked in an interrupt thread and should only be used
for limited work.
.Pp
The
.Fn systimer_init_periodic
function initializes a systimer callback function to be called at frequency
.Fa hz .
The
.Fa info
argument is an allocated systimer structure; the
.Fa func
argument is the function to call, with argument
.Fa data .
.Pp
The
.Fn systimer_init_periodic_nq
function initializes a systimer callback function to be called at a frequency
.Fa hz .
Unlike the
.Fn systimer_init_periodic
function, the
.Fn systimer_init_periodic_nq
function's callback is only called once at a given time, even if delays caused
multiple time intervals to have occurred.
.Pp
The
.Fn systimer_adjust_periodic
function changes the frequency at which a systimer's callback is invoked.
The
current time interval is not affected.
The
.Fa hz
argument specifies the new frequency.
.Pp
The
.Fn systimer_init_oneshot
function arranges for a systimer callback function
.Fa func
to be invoked with argument
.Fa data
once, after at least
.Fa us
microseconds.
.Sh EXAMPLE
A simple example of using a one-short systimer to call a function after a short
time:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&...
static struct systimer short_st;
char *str = "goodbye!";
\&...
systimer_init_oneshot(&short_st, panic, str, 1000);
\&...
.Ed
.Sh FILES
The systimer implementation is in
.Pa /sys/kern/kern_systimer.c .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr callout 9
.Sh HISTORY
Systimers first appeared in
.Dx 1.0 .
