.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The DragonFly Project.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The DragonFly Project
.\" by Venkatesh Srinivas <me@endeavour.zapto.org>.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The DragonFly Project nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific, prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 30, 2012
.Dt TOKEN 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lwkt_token_init ,
.Nm lwkt_token_uninit ,
.Nm lwkt_gettoken ,
.Nm lwkt_trytoken ,
.Nm lwkt_reltoken ,
.Nm lwkt_token_pool_lookup ,
.Nm lwkt_getpooltoken ,
.\".Nm lwkt_relpooltoken ,
.Nm lwkt_token_swap
.Nd soft token locks
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/thread.h
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_token_init "struct lwkt_token *tok" "const char *desc"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_token_uninit "struct lwkt_token *tok"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_gettoken "struct lwkt_token *tok"
.Ft int
.Fn lwkt_trytoken "struct lwkt_token *tok"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_reltoken "struct lwkt_token *tok"
.Ft struct lwkt_token *
.Fn lwkt_token_pool_lookup "void *ptr"
.Ft struct lwkt_token *
.Fn lwkt_getpooltoken "void *ptr"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_gettoken_shared "struct lwkt_token *tok"
.Ft void
.Fn lwkt_token_swap "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A soft token is a lock which is only held while a thread is running.
If a thread explicitly blocks, all its tokens are released, and reacquired
when the thread resumes.
While a thread blocks, the conditions protected by a soft token
may change and may need to be reevaluated on wakeup.
.Pp
Tokens may be taken recursively.
However, tokens must be released in the reverse order they were acquired.
.Pp
Tokens may be acquired in shared mode, allowing multiple concurrent holders,
via
.Fn lwkt_gettoken_shared ,
or in exclusive mode, allowing only one holder, via
.Fn lwkt_gettoken .
It is safe to acquire a token shared while holding it exclusively.
A thread attempting to acquire a token exclusively after holding it shared
will deadlock.
.Pp
The pool token interface exists to allow using tokens with data structures
which may be deallocated.
It allows getting a token reference from an address, which
is implemented by a set of statically allocated tokens and a hash function.
.Pp
It is not recommended to take pool tokens in shared mode.
A hash collision
from a subsequent exclusive pool token request will hit the
exclusive-after-shared deadlock.
.Pp
The
.Fn lwkt_token_init
function is called to initialize a token.
The
.Fa desc
argument specifies the wait string displayed when waiting for the token.
The
.Fn lwkt_token_uninit
function is called to de-initialize one.
Before using a token, it must be initialized.
.Pp
The
.Fn lwkt_gettoken
function attempts to acquire a token.
If it is unsuccessful, the calling thread blocks.
The
.Fn lwkt_trytoken
does the same thing; however, if it cannot acquire the token, it returns 0
instead of blocking.
The
.Fn lwkt_reltoken
function releases a previously acquired soft token.
.Pp
The
.Fn lwkt_token_pool_lookup
function takes an address and maps it to one of a number of statically
allocated tokens.
The
.Fn lwkt_getpooltoken
function acquires a token associated with an address.
Use these two functions when tokens must protect a data structure,
but the structure can be deallocated.
Pool tokens do not need to be initialized.
.Pp
The
.Fn lwkt_token_swap
function swaps the two most recently acquired tokens; this allows release of
tokens out-of-order.
This function should not be called when less than two tokens are held.
.Sh FILES
The LWKT Token implementation is in
.Pa /sys/kern/lwkt_token.c .
.Sh EXAMPLES
A simple example of using a token to protect access to a data structure:
.Bd -literal
/* Data structure to be protected */
struct protected_data {
	struct lwkt_token tok;
	int data;
};

struct protected_data pdata;

/* Called early in boot */
void
init(void)
{
	lwkt_token_init(&pdata.tok, "example");
	pdata.data = 0;
}

/*
 * A silly kthread; it uses a token to protect pdata.data.
 */
void
kthread1(void)
{
	int local;

	/*
	 * Get the soft token.
	 */
	lwkt_gettoken(&pdata.tok);
	for (;;) {
		local = pdata.data++;
		tsleep(pdata, 0, "sleep", 0);
		/*
		 * While we are asleep, we do not hold the token. When we
		 * awake here, we will hold the token again, but we may not
		 * depend on local reflecting pdata.data.
		 */

		local = pdata.data;
		if (local == 4)
			break;
	}
	/*
	 * Release the token.
	 */
	lwkt_reltoken(&pdata.tok);
}
.Ed
.Pp
An example using pool tokens:
.Bd -literal
struct dynamic_data {
	int ref;
};

/*
 * Use a token to protect a reference count in a dynamic structure.
 * Embedding a token in the structure would be inappropriate, since
 * another thread may attempt to take the token after we have freed
 * the object but before we have removed all external references to it.
 */
void
kfunction(struct dynamic_data *dynptr)
{
	struct lwkt_token *tok;

	/*
	 * Get a token from the associated with the address of dynptr
	 */
	tok = lwkt_getpooltoken(dynptr);
	dynptr->ref--;
	if (dynptr->ref == 0)
		free(dynptr);

	/*
	 * Release the token via its reference, as above
	 */
	lwkt_reltoken(tok);
}
.Ed
.Sh NOTES
Soft tokens are not released when a thread is preempted; they are only released
when a thread explicitly blocks, such as via
.Fn tsleep
or
.Fn lwkt_switch .
.Pp
If
.Fn lwkt_gettoken
blocks while attempting to acquire a token, all currently-held tokens will
be released till a thread can acquire all of them again.
.Pp
When tokens are held and
.Fn tsleep_interlock
is used, tokens are not released until blocking happens - that is until the
.Fn tsleep
paired with the
.Fn tsleep_interlock
is called.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crit_enter 9 ,
.Xr lockmgr 9 ,
.Xr serializer 9 ,
.Xr sleep 9 ,
.Xr spinlock 9
.Sh HISTORY
LWKT tokens first appeared in
.Dx 1.0 .
Shared tokens first appeared in
.Dx 2.11 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm token
implementation was written by
.An Matthew Dillon .
