.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Kelly Yancey
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"    $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/tvtohz.9,v 1.1.4.2 2001/12/17 11:30:19 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd June 30, 2007
.Dt TVTOHZ 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tvtohz_high ,
.Nm tvtohz_low
.Nd convert time interval to tick count
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/time.h
.Ft int
.Fn tvtohz_high "struct timeval *tv"
.Ft int
.Fn tvtohz_low "struct timeval *tv"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn tvtohz_high
and
.Fn tvtohz_low
functions accept a single argument
.Fa tv
which specifies the time interval over which to calculate the number
of system ticks that would elapse.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn tvtohz_high
function returns the integral number of system ticks expected to elapse
in the given interval.
The return value is intended to be used in a clock interrupt timed operation
and guaranteed to meet or exceed the requested time.
The minimum return value is 1 tick and the function will average the
calculation up.
If any value greater than 0 microseconds is supplied, a value of at least 2
will be returned to ensure that a near-term clock interrupt does not cause
the timeout to occur (degenerately) early.
.Pp
The
.Fn tvtohz_low
function returns the uncompensated number of system ticks for the specified
amount of time.
A return value of 0 is possible if
.Fa tv
converts to less than 1 tick.
.Pp
If the reprensentation overflows, both functions return
.Dv INT_MAX .
.Sh FILES
.Pa sys/kern/kern_clock.c
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr callout 9 ,
.Xr microtime 9 ,
.Xr microuptime 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm tvtohz
function first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
It was split into
.Nm
and
.Nm tvtohz_low
by
.An Matt Dillon
in
.Dx 1.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was originally written by
.An Kelly Yancey Aq Mt kbyanc@posi.net
and later updated by
.An Sascha Wildner .
