.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/vget.9,v 1.5.2.1 2001/12/17 11:30:19 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd May 5, 2007
.Dt VGET 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vget
.Nd Acquire a primary reference, lock, and reactivate a vnode
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn vget "struct vnode *vp" "int lockflag"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Acquire a primary reference to vnode and lock it, reactivating the vnode
from the cache or free list if necessary.
This kernel function must be used if the vnode in hand is
not already known to be actively referenced, such as when obtaining
the vnode pointer from a namecache or VM object structure.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa lockflag"
.It Fa vp
The vnode being acquired, typically obtained from some other system
structure.
.It Fa lockflag
Must be
.Dv LK_SHARED
or
.Dv LK_EXCLUSIVE .
Passing 0 is illegal.
.Dv LK_NOWAIT
may be logically ORd in if you do not wish to block and can handle the
additional error codes that might be returned.
.El
.Pp
When not in use, vnodes are kept on a free list or marked as being cached.
The vnodes still reference valid files but may be reused to refer to a
new file at any time.
Often, references to these vnodes are present in auxiliary structures
related to the vnode, such as namecache entries and VM objects.
.Pp
When acquiring a vnode pointer from these auxiliary structures the
.Nm
function must be used to both reference and, if necessary, reactivate
the vnode.  The vnode will also be locked accordingly.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
0 is returned on success,
.Er ENOENT
is returned if the vnode becomes unusable while
.Nm
is blocked trying to lock it, and other errors may be returned as well.
.Er ENOENT
is not typically considered to be a fatal error but simply an
indication that the caller needs to relookup the vnode as related
structures may be in the midst of being destroyed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vdrop 9 ,
.Xr vhold 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr vn_lock 9 ,
.Xr vn_unlock 9 ,
.Xr vput 9 ,
.Xr vref 9 ,
.Xr vrele 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
