.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/vm_map_findspace.9,v 1.5.22.1.4.1 2010/06/14 02:09:06 kensmith Exp $
.\"
.Dd December 8, 2010
.Dt VM_MAP_FINDSPACE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_map_findspace
.Nd find a free region within a map
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_map.h
.Ft int
.Fo vm_map_findspace
.Fa "vm_map_t map" "vm_offset_t start" "vm_size_t length" "vm_size_t align" "int flags" "vm_offset_t *addr"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_map_findspace
function attempts to find a region with sufficient space in the
.Fa map
for an object of size
.Fa length
at the address
.Fa addr
with the alignment
.Fa align .
The flags parameter can be:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa flags"
.It Dv MAP_STACK
The space returned is for stack regions and can intersect the stack address
space.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
It is the caller's responsibility to obtain a lock on the
.Fa map
before calling this function.
.Pp
This routine may call
.Fn pmap_growkernel
to grow the kernel's address space, if and only if the mapping is being
made within the kernel address space, and if insufficient space remains
in the
.Va kernel_map .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn vm_map_findspace
function returns the value 0 if successful, and
.Fa *addr
will contain the first virtual address in the found region;
otherwise, the value 1 is returned.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
