.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/VOP_ACCESS.9,v 1.7.2.4 2001/12/17 11:30:18 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 8, 2014
.Dt VOP_ACCESS 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_ACCESS
.Nd "check access permissions of a file or Unix domain socket"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_ACCESS "struct vnode *vp" "int mode" "struct ucred *cred"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This entry point checks the access permissions of the file against the
given credentials.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width mode
.It Ar vp
the vnode of the file to check
.It Ar mode
the type of access required
.It Ar cred
the user credentials to check
.El
.Pp
The
.Fa mode
is a mask which can contain
.Dv VREAD ,
.Dv VWRITE
or
.Dv VEXEC .
.Sh LOCKS
No requirements.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If the file is accessible in the specified way, then zero is returned,
otherwise an appropriate error code is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EPERM
An attempt was made to change an immutable file
.It Bq Er EACCES
Permission denied
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
