.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/VOP_GETPAGES.9,v 1.4.2.2 2001/12/17 11:30:18 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd May 6, 2020
.Dt VOP_GETPAGES 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_GETPAGES ,
.Nm VOP_PUTPAGES
.Nd read or write VM pages from a file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.In vm/vm.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES "struct vnode *vp" "vm_page_t *m" "int count" "int reqpage" "vm_ooffset_t offset" "int seqaccess"
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_PUTPAGES "struct vnode *vp" "vm_page_t *m" "int count" "int flags" "int *rtvals" "vm_ooffset_t offset"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa seqaccess"
.It Fa vp
The file to access.
.It Fa m
Pointer to a page array representing a contiguous region of the file to
be read or written.
.It Fa count
The length of this array.
.It Fa flags
.Dv OBJPC_*
flags, see
.In vm/vm_pager.h .
.It Fa rtvals
An array of VM system result codes indicating the status of each
page written by
.Fn VOP_PUTPAGES .
.It Fa reqpage
Index of the requested page.
.It Fa offset
Offset in the file to start accessing.
.It Fa seqaccess
Sequential access.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
