.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/VOP_RENAME.9,v 1.10.2.2 2001/12/17 11:30:18 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 13, 2014
.Dt VOP_OLD_RENAME 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_OLD_RENAME
.Nd rename a file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_OLD_RENAME "struct vnode *fdvp" "struct vnode *fvp" "struct componentname *fcnp" "struct vnode *tdvp" "struct vnode *tvp" "struct componentname *tcnp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This renames a file and possibly changes its parent directory.
If the destination object exists, it will be removed first.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width fdvp
.It Fa fdvp
the vnode of the old parent directory
.It Fa fvp
the vnode of the file to be renamed
.It Fa fcnp
pathname information about the file's current name
.It Fa tdvp
the vnode of the new parent directory
.It Fa tvp
the vnode of the target file (if it exists)
.It Fa tcnp
pathname information about the file's new name
.El
.Sh LOCKS
The source directory and file are unlocked but are expected to have their
ref count bumped on entry.  The VOP routine is expected to
.Fn vrele
both prior
to returning.
.Pp
The destination directory and file are locked as well as having their ref
count bumped.  The VOP routine is expected to
.Fn vput
both prior to
returning.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EPERM
the file is immutable
.It Bq Er EXDEV
cross device move
.It Bq Er EINVAL
illegal directory rename
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
attempt to rename a directory to a file or vice versa
.It Bq Er ENOTEMPTY
attempt to remove a directory which is not empty
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
