.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/VOP_CREATE.9,v 1.9.2.1 2001/12/17 11:30:18 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 13, 2014
.Dt VOP_OLD_CREATE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_OLD_CREATE ,
.Nm VOP_OLD_MKNOD ,
.Nm VOP_OLD_MKDIR ,
.Nm VOP_OLD_SYMLINK
.Nd create a file, socket, fifo, device, directory or symlink
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.In sys/namei.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_OLD_CREATE "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode **vpp" "struct componentname *cnp" "struct vattr *vap"
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_OLD_MKNOD "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode **vpp" "struct componentname *cnp" "struct vattr *vap"
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_OLD_MKDIR "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode **vpp" "struct componentname *cnp" "struct vattr *vap"
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_OLD_SYMLINK "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode **vpp" "struct componentname *cnp" "struct vattr *vap" "char *target"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These entry points create a new file, socket, fifo, device, directory or symlink
in a given directory.
.Pp
The arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width target
.It Fa dvp
the locked vnode of the directory
.It Fa vpp
the address of a variable where the resulting locked vnode should be stored
.It Fa cnp
the pathname component created
.It Fa vap
the attributes that the new object should be created with
.It Fa target
the pathname of the target of the symlink
.El
.Pp
These entry points are called after
.Xr VOP_OLD_LOOKUP 9
when an object is being created.
If an error is detected when creating the file,
then this memory will be freed.
If the file is created successfully, then it will be freed.
.Sh LOCKS
The directory,
.Fa dvp
will be locked on entry and must remain locked on return.
If the call is successful, the new object will be returned locked.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the vnode for the new object is placed in
.Fa *vpp
and zero is returned.  Otherwise, an appropriate error is returned.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOSPC
The filesystem is full.
.It Bq Er EDQUOT
Quota exceeded.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr VOP_OLD_LOOKUP 9
.Sh HISTORY
The function
.Nm
appeared in
.Bx 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
