.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/vrele.9,v 1.6.2.2 2001/12/17 11:30:19 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd May 5, 2007
.Dt VRELE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vrele
.Nd Release a previously obtained primary reference for a vnode
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft void
.Fn vrele "struct vnode *vp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The caller is holding a primary reference to the vnode and wishes to
release it.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa vp"
.It Fa vp
The vnode being released.
.El
.Pp
Any code in the system which obtains a primary reference to a vnode via
.Xr vref 9
typically releases that reference with
.Fn vrele
when it is finished with the vnode.
Upon release of the last primary
reference, the vnode will be deactivated and either moved to the free
list for later reuse or marked as being cache.
The vnode can be reactivated at any time prior to the system reusing it.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vdrop 9 ,
.Xr vget 9 ,
.Xr vhold 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9 ,
.Xr vn_lock 9 ,
.Xr vn_unlock 9 ,
.Xr vput 9 ,
.Xr vref 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
